# Chapter 11. AWS Compute Services

You love programming and spend your free time designing and creating new software applications on your personal computer. You recently created an application that converts input images to cartoon images and demoed this to your friend, who happens to be a software engineer at a big tech company. The friend really liked the idea and suggested sharing the application with other people—plus it can help you earn some extra dollars. But how can you achieve this task? How can you make a program running on a personal computer accessible to other people?

For this specific example, you need some mechanism that allows people to send an image to a personal computer and the personal computer to return the output as a cartoon image via the internet. In this scenario, the personal computer is acting as a server. A server is nothing but a computer that is running most of the time (i.e., a highly available application), responsible for serving any kind of request. This server can be accessible just to you, to any other computer, or to other users, who all are referred to as clients .

Servers are an essential part of any application, and AWS offers multiple compute platforms to run applications. A compute platform in the AWS cloud is a virtual server hosted in an AWS data center that can be accessed over the internet. We’ll start our discussion with a compute platform similar to a personal computer called Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2), and then we’ll move on to AWS Lambda and containerization services present in the AWS cloud.

# Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud

Amazon EC2 is a scalable virtual server hosting services provided by AWS. We can leverage the EC2 service to create VMs in the AWS cloud with a required set of configurations, such as CPU, memory, storage, networking, and so on. These VMs or virtual computing environments are called instances . AWS provides the option to select bare-metal servers or to go with a virtualized environment maintained via hypervisor, which should be determined by identifying your business and compliance requirements. Here are general descriptions of bare-metal and hypervisor servers:

Bare-metal server

Physical servers dedicated to a single tenant. These servers are helpful for workloads that require direct access to Intel Xeon processor infrastructure, such as Intel virtualization (VT-x) , that have a strict compliance requirement, or that need to run a custom hypervisor. For example, you might need to run Oracle Hypervisor instead of Nitro.

Hypervisor

A virtualization component for running multiple VMs on a single physical server, as shown in Figure 11-1 . Hypervisor helps allocate computing resources, such as CPU and memory, to VMs running their own OS and applications. AWS supports two hypervisors based on available instance types: Xen and Nitro . The Nitro system is a new-generation hypervisor with enhanced security and performance.

[image: image]

###### Figure 11-1. Xen hypervisor

Launching and running instances in the AWS cloud is easy and removes the headache of maintaining physical hardware. EC2 instances can be launched with just a few clicks on the AWS Console by following the steps in the AWS documentation . The instances are launched with a specific set of configurations that are determined by Amazon Machine Image (AMI).

###### Note

One EC2 instance doesn’t necessarily map to one physical server in the AWS cloud.

## Amazon Machine Image

We can launch an EC2 instance with different configurations, such as the OS, the storage volumes attached to the instance, the install dependencies before instance bootup, custom security configurations, and so on. These configurations can be defined via a preconfigured template called an AMI , which enables easy, efficient provisioning of EC2 instances with the desired software stack. Consider a scenario where you as an engineer are responsible for installing security dependencies to all the EC2 instances launched in an organization. One way is to run scripts on these EC2 instances after they are launched, but a more optimal way would be to create a base AMI with all the required dependencies installed. This saves a lot of time and ensures 100% confidence that none of the EC2 instances are missed for the required dependencies.

As customers, we can launch EC2 instances using freely available AMIs from the AWS community, purchase AMIs from third parties such as Red Hat, or create our own custom AMIs depending on our needs. For example, Amazon Linux and Linux 2 AMIs are available free of cost and are fully supported and maintained by AWS. AWS provides a marketplace where users can choose from a wide variety of publicly available AMIs. Here are few considerations for choosing the best AMI for your business use case:

Region

AMIs are created specific to the region. If an AMI is not available in a specific region, you can copy the AMI to the required region and use it to launch EC2 instances.

OS and architecture

EC2 instance runs on an OS, and you can choose from multiple OS flavors (32-bit or 64-bit architectures) supported by AWS .

Launch permissions

An AMI can be owned by AWS, businesses, or individuals, and it can be made available to the general public, a set of users, or just a single individual.

Root device storage

AMIs are backed either by Amazon EBS or by an instance store (see Chapter 10 for more details) as root device storage. The root device storage contains the image used to boot the EC2 instance. There are significant differences between these storage choices , such as size limit (64 TB for EBS io2 Block Express and 10 GB for instance store), data persistence, and boot time (usually less than one minute for EBS and less than five minutes for instance store).

###### Note

You can find the complete details on EC2 instance root device storage in the AWS documentation .

The next decision we need to make is the instance type. AWS offers a wide range of instance types based on different capabilities, and we can choose which best suits our requirements.

## Instance Type

Hardware requirements can vary from customer to customer, so with this in mind, the EC2 service provides different instance types. Instance types define the hardware and performance characteristics of an EC2 instance. We might not always have a concrete answer for which instance type is most suitable. We can start by installing our application on any general-purpose instance and then perform load testing. This will help determine the limits where this specific instance breaks and can eventually help us figure out the instance type and the number of instances needed for the workload.

Different instance types offer varying combinations of CPU, memory, storage, and networking capacities. The following are the different instance type families available:

General-purpose instances

Suitable for most of the workloads in the industry. They maintain a fine balance between compute, memory, and network resources.

Compute-optimized instances

Suitable for CPU-intensive workloads, such as high-performance computing, big data analytics, and so on.

Memory-optimized instances

Suitable for workloads with requirements for large dataset processing in RAM, such as in-memory caches.

Storage-optimized instances

Suitable for workloads with requirements for high sequential read and write access to large datasets on local storage such as databases.

Accelerated-computing instances

GPU-based instances that are suitable for workloads with requirements for high-performance computing, computational finance, ML, and so on.

Choosing the appropriate instance type is crucial for achieving optimal performance and cost-efficiency for specific workloads. For updated guidance on instance types and instance families, refer to the AWS page on EC2 instance types .

Here are some additional considerations to be mindful of when you launch an EC2 instance:

- To establish a connection with an instance after it has launched, you should select a key pair to enable Secure Shell (SSH) access to the instance.
- EC2 instances are launched at the AZ level within a specific region. EC2 allows you to modify default network configurations, such as the VPC instance it should be launched in, the subnet in the VPC, the security group, and so on. These configurations help determine how the connection to launched instances will be established.
- You can choose to assign a public IP to an instance. Public IP assignment allows connections to an instance directly from the public internet, given that you’ve set the appropriate permissions via either security groups or NACLs.

For running the application at scale, we need a good balance of vertical and horizontal scaling for a number of instances in the entire infrastructure. By looking at usage metrics, we can figure out the minimum number of instances that will be required throughout a longer period. For such scenarios, cost can be reduced by using reserved EC2 instance capacity to get up to a 72% discount compared to on-demand instance pricing based on the usage commitment (a one-year or three-year commitment). Note that on-demand instances are instances that we launch as needed from the AWS Console, while we precommit to using EC2 instances for a certain period of time in the case of reserved instances.

There may be use cases where we’re not much worried about losing (terminating) an instance while the workload is running or the workload can be resumed later once instances are available in the EC2 pool. For such scenarios, we can leverage something called spot instances .

Spot instances are less expensive than on-demand instances. Let’s take an example: assume the us-east-1a AZ has a total capacity of 100 m4.large instances. Out of these 100, half are already in use by customers. Based on AWS historic analysis, 30 instances will be requested by customers shortly as dedicated capacity. In this EC2 pool of 100 instances, 20 instances are left that no one is benefiting from—neither AWS nor its customers. So these instances are made available as spot instances at a lower cost. Customers can request spot instances from this pool for usage. For scenarios like AWS customers requiring more than the 30 available instances, as predicted earlier, any of the spot instances can be turned off and assigned to the requesting customers.

Traffic on applications running on top of EC2 instances can vary across the day, and we might not always require a fixed number of running EC2 instances. For example, the application requires 10 instances at noon but only 2 at midnight. AWS offers an autoscaling feature that automatically adds and removes instances for the application. Let’s dive into autoscaling next.

## Autoscaling

Autoscaling is an AWS feature that automatically adjusts the number of EC2 instances in the collection in response to changing workload demands. We can create a collection of EC2 instances based on any factor, such as AZ, instance type, and so on. These collections are called autoscaling groups (ASGs) when autoscaling is enabled on them. In these groups, we can specify the minimum and maximum number of instances and apply an autoscaling policy for automatically adding and removing the instances within this limit. This helps maintain application performance and availability by dynamically scaling the capacity up or down based on predefined scaling policies.

Autoscaling can be configured to scale based on metrics like CPU utilization, network traffic, or user-defined metrics. It ensures that the application scales seamlessly to handle increased traffic and reduces costs during periods of low demand. Apart from handling scale, autoscaling can ensure that a fixed number of instances are always running in a healthy state (instances are replaced in case of health-check failures). Here is how a new instance is added as a cumulative CPU utilization limit is breached for an ASG (see Figure 11-2 ):

- For ASG 1, the minimum number of instances configured is one and the maximum is four.
- Assume that the autoscaling policy states that a new instance is added to the group if maximum CPU utilization exceeds 75% for five continuous minutes.
- As the limit is breached, autoscaling kicks in with the desired number of instances going from one to two, and a new EC2 instance is launched.

Large applications in the AWS cloud might be running thousands of EC2 machines to serve customer traffic or internal system processing, and failures are bound to happen. The EC2 instances might go down due to unforeseen hardware failures, and we as customers should have proper mechanisms in place to overcome these failures. There are multiple ways to handle these issues:

- Autoscaling policies to always maintain the desired number of instances within a group
- EC2 instances launched in multiple AZs to withstand AZ failure
- EC2 automatic recovery to relaunch the instance in case of failure; the instance is relaunched with the same configurations, such as instance ID, metadata, attached EBS volumes, private IPs, and EIP addresses

[image: image]

###### Figure 11-2. Autoscaling

Autoscaling is a great tool for scaling instances up and down, but there is a limit to how quickly the instances are launched to address spiky traffic workloads. Relying on autoscaling for spiky traffic might abruptly cut off application availability; we recommend prescaling of instances for such events (for example, a live cricket match or an NFL event) or setting scaling configurations to a lower number (for example, set instance addition at 60% CPU utilization instead of 80%). To reduce application launch and startup time on new instances, keep the application image size as small as possible and don’t include unwanted dependencies.

Apart from configuring the minimum and maximum number of instances in a scaling activity, we can define a cooldown period (the default is 300 seconds). After a scaling activity (launch or termination of an instance), AWS waits for the defined cooldown period before initiating any further scaling activities, ensuring stability of the ASG.

EC2 is the oldest and most widely used service for running applications in the AWS cloud. EC2 provides control over maintaining the software stack and maximum visibility of hardware operations. However, it might not always be a requirement to know how application software is deployed, or you might want to avoid any operational maintenance of systems, such as OS patching. AWS offers serverless services where customers don’t need to worry about instance provisioning or capacity planning. Serverless , as the name suggests, abstracts out server details and allows us to directly run our workloads. AWS Lambda operates on a serverless model, supporting code execution with the required scale.

# AWS Lambda

AWS Lambda is a fully managed, serverless compute service that lets users run code without the overhead of server maintenance. The only thing we need to run our applications on Lambda is code in our preferred language, referred to as Lambda function . Lambda supports multiple programming languages and enables rapid development and deployment of event-driven applications. The backend architecture of Lambda is provisioned per function runtime and executed on customer invocation events. Lambda automatically scales the underlying infrastructure to match the workload, providing high availability and reliability. Here are the main concepts relating to the Lambda service that you should understand:

Function

An application’s codebase in your preferred programming language that is supported by Lambda. Function is invoked with the help of a trigger to execute specific logic.

Trigger

Any resource or configuration that is responsible for invoking Lambda function—for example, invocation via the AWS Console or via any AWS services, such as Amazon SQS, Amazon DynamoDB streams, Amazon Kinesis, and so on.

Event

A custom JSON-formatted document or any other structure specific to an AWS service, such as SNS notification, which is used to pass information to Lambda function for processing.

Lambda execution environment

Lambda backend infrastructure internally creates a secure, isolated runtime environment for function execution. This runtime environment is called the execution environment and is set up with the help of user inputs, such as function language runtime, available memory, and maximum execution time for function (the maximum supported configuration is 15 minutes). The Lambda execution shuts down as the execution time elapses. The execution environment is launched with a specific instruction set architecture, and Lambda offers two types of architectures to determine computer processor type:

- ARM64 with 64-bit ARM architecture for AWS Graviton2 processors
- x86-64 with 64-bit x86 architecture for x86-based processors

We recommend using ARM64 architecture for cost and performance efficiency over x86.

Deployment package

The Lambda function code can be deployed via a deployment package in two ways:

- A .zip file with code and its dependencies stored in Amazon S3 with a maximum allowed size of 250 MB. Lambda provides the OS and runtime for function.
- A container image stored in Amazon ECR with the code and its dependencies and a maximum allowed size of 10 GB. The image should be compatible with OCI and should include the OS and runtime .

Layers

Common code, such as utilities or libraries, can be zipped as layers instead of adding them to each Lambda function. Layers can be attached to Lambda for code sharing, reducing the overall Lambda function code bundle size and decreasing the startup time. Layers also support versioning to maintain multiple versions of code libraries and ensure backward compatibility.

Destination

Another AWS service configured to receive invocation records upon completion (success or failure) of asynchronous Lambda execution. AWS supports standard SQS queue, standard SNS topic, Lambda function, and EventBridge event bus as destinations.

###### Note

AWS often adds new language runtimes; check the Lambda documentation for updated guidance on supported language runtimes.

The way Lambda function should be invoked for processing depends on your use case. Some options include an object addition to an S3 bucket or a weekly schedule via CloudWatch events , or you may choose a specific trigger for Lambda invocation. Lambda supports three types of invocation modes :

Synchronous invocation

Synchronous invocation can be achieved in multiple ways: via the Amazon API Gateway, an ALB, the AWS CLI, and so on. In this invocation mode, customers wait for a response until Lambda completes its execution. This is preferred for latency-sensitive workloads with a maximum of a 15-minute execution timeout. In case Lambda is triggered via any AWS service, the execution timeout could be less, such as 29 seconds for API Gateway.

Asynchronous invocation

Asynchronous invocation can be achieved via S3, SNS, CloudWatch events, and so on. In this invocation mode, the response is returned immediately, and the request is queued by Lambda for processing. It can also be configured to handle retries and direct invocation responses to a configured destination , unlike synchronous mode.

Polling invocation

This is the preferred mode for stream- or queue-based services, such as DynamoDB streams, Kinesis, SQS queues, or Kafka. In this invocation mode, Lambda polls the AWS service and synchronously invokes Lambda function for processing. The benefit is that AWS doesn’t charge customers for message polling; we pay only for Lambda function invocation. The retry mechanism is dependent on the data expiration in the AWS service, such as from one minute to 14 days for an SQS queue.

We mentioned Lambda provision resources on invocation, which could result in more request processing time due to cold-start problems. Cold start refers to the time Lambda takes to provision resources and prepare an execution environment involving function code downloaded from S3 or ECR, creating an environment with memory and runtime configurations and executing any initialization code out of the main function code. After this complete setup, Lambda starts serving customer requests. The cold-start time could vary from 100 ms to one second and typically occurs for 1% of total invocations, as analyzed by AWS on production workloads. AWS recommends multiple ways to reduce cold-start problems:

Warm start

The execution environment is not deleted as soon as the function completes its execution but rather is retained for some time so as to serve continuous requests invoking the same Lambda function. This skips the setup of execution time on each Lambda invocation, which is referred to as a warm start . The cold start is not in the customer’s hands, and Lambda can create an execution environment on a need basis. For example, Lambda creates a fresh execution environment for concurrent invocation to handle increasing traffic. We can use warm start to our advantage by intentionally invoking Lambda function with dummy input before it serves actual requests. This approach is only recommended for scheduled or low-traffic workloads, not for production environments operating at large scale.

Provisioned concurrency

Provisioned concurrency ensures that the execution environment is set up in advance, ready to serve requests. For example, Lambda function with a provisioned concurrency of four will create four execution environments in parallel, which can be extremely helpful for functions with a large initialization codebase.

Memory configurations

AWS provides 
            an option to configure memory for Lambda function that ranges from 128 MB to 10,240 MB. The compute power allocated to Lambda function is proportional to the configured memory, so it is advisable to tune memory settings to improve performance. You can come up with the best memory configuration for your workload by running test runs on Lambda function, or you can explore using the Lambda Power Tuning tool for this purpose.

Static initialization optimization

As Lambda prepares the execution environment, it configures any required connections or downloads code dependencies. A large number of dependencies can definitely add to the cold-start time, so it is recommended to import only required dependencies. If the function codebase becomes too large where such a scenario is not feasible, other avenues can be explored, such as breaking a function into multiple child functions.

SnapStart

For Java 11 runtime environments, SnapStart improves function startup time by taking an encrypted snapshot of the memory and disk state of the initialized execution environment. The new function invocation resumes its execution from the cached snapshot, thereby improving on the cold-start time.

As mentioned, Lambda supports a variety of invocation modes and scales automatically for required traffic. The key factor when deciding whether to choose Lambda as a compute platform is determining whether you’re fine with too much abstraction of infrastructure. Consider: is there a requirement to fine-tune system efficiency at the infrastructure level? Is it OK if there is a latency spike due to cold-start issues? These are some of the questions you should try to answer to make your decision.

We discussed different containerization concepts in Chapter 7 . Next, we’ll explore how we can use containers as a compute platform and launch our systems on the AWS cloud.

# Containerization Services

AWS offers container orchestration for running Docker containers via two services: Amazon Elastic Container Service (ECS) and Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS). ECS is a fully managed container orchestration service, whereas EKS is a managed service for running open source Kubernetes on the AWS cloud.

###### Note

This section builds on concepts covered in Chapter 7 —read that chapter first.

## Amazon Elastic Container Service

Amazon ECS is a fully managed, highly available service for managing deployment, operations, and scaling of containerized applications for the required traffic load. ECS integrates with other AWS services, such as Amazon EC2, Amazon ECR, and AWS ELB, to provide a complete container management solution. The following is some important terminology related to Amazon ECS:

Task

A task is the basic unit of deployment in ECS responsible for running one or more containers, as shown in Figure 11-3 .

[image: A screenshot of a computer program

Description automatically generated]

###### Figure 11-3. ECS task, service, and cluster representation

ECS service

The ECS service groups identical tasks to scale and monitors them in a single place.

ECS cluster

The infrastructure is registered to an ECS cluster, which acts as a logical grouping of ECS tasks or services running via ECS Fargate, ECS EC2 launch types, or both types in the single cluster.

Task definitions

These define various configurations for a task, such as runtime platform, task size, launch type, data volumes, environment variables, container definitions for configurations specific to containers launched within a task, and so on. Task definitions enable you to define complex multicontainer applications and specify how they should be orchestrated. Here is an example with Fargate as the launch option:

```
{
   “family”: “fargate-task-definition”,
   “containerDefinitions”: [ 
      {
         “image”: “AwsAccId.dkr.ecr.us-west-2.amazonaws.com/repository:tag”,
         “name”: “my-fargate-application”,
         “portMappings”: [ 
            { 
               “containerPort”: 80,
               “hostPort”: 80,
            }
         ]
      }
   ],
   “essential”: true,
   “cpu”: “256”,
   “memory”: “512”,
   “executionRoleArn”: “arn:aws:iam::AwsAccId:role/ecsTaskExecutionRole”,
   “networkMode”: “awsvpc”,
   “runtimePlatform”: {
        “operatingSystemFamily”: “LINUX”
    },
   “requiresCompatibilities”: [ 
       “FARGATE” 
    ]
}
```

Amazon Elastic Container Registry 

Amazon ECR is an AWS-managed container image registry that can be used to push, pull, and manage Docker or OCI images.

Two types of launch options are available with ECS: (1) ECS EC2, where we manage our containers on a fleet of EC2 machines, and (2) ECS Fargate, a serverless option where we hand over complete operational management responsibility to AWS. The key differences between these two deployment options are listed in Table 11-1 .

| Comparison factor | Amazon ECS EC2 | Amazon ECS Fargate |
|---|---|---|
| Operational management | The compute layer is managed by customers, such as instance type and number of EC2 instances, application scaling, OS-level patching, and so on. EC2 supports autoscaling to adjust the number of instances based on resource utilization or application demand. | Serverless, meaning customers don’t have to worry about server management tasks, such as applying OS security patches. Customers can specify OS, vCPU, memory , and autoscaling configurations. |
| Pricing | There is no separate cost for ECS; customers are charged for the running time of EC2 instances plus any storage selection, such as EBS volumes. | Cost is based on vCPU, memory, CPU architecture, and storage selection for ECS tasks or EKS pods, and customers are charged only when container workloads are active. |
| Business use cases | AWS recommends ECS EC2 for workloads with high CPU or memory requirements, cost-optimization requirements, application requirements for persistent storage access, or compliance and organization requirements to manage infrastructure on your own. | AWS recommends ECS Fargate for large workloads to be optimized for low overheads, small workloads with occasional bursts, and batch workloads. |
| Limitations | There is extra operational overhead at the customer’s end for selecting EC2 instances, maintaining fleets, patching the OS, and so on. | There is no support for graphics processing unit (GPU) and EBS volumes for persistent storage. You can use EFS volumes for persistent storage and bind mounts for ephemeral storage. In short, fewer customizations are available compared to ECS EC2. |

ECS seamlessly integrates with other AWS services, such as Amazon CloudWatch for observability, AWS IAM for security and access control, AWS Cloud Map , and AWS ALB to provide service discovery and load balancing capabilities. Cloud Map allows users to register and discover services dynamically, making it easier for containers to communicate with one another. ALB provides load balancing across containers, distributing traffic based on configured rules, which helps achieve high availability and scalability.

Here are some additional key benefits of ECS:

Scalability

ECS allows you to scale your containerized applications seamlessly based on demand. It automatically adjusts resources to handle traffic spikes efficiently via autoscaling or serverless compute options.

High availability

ECS ensures high availability of your containers by spreading them across multiple AZs within a region. It automatically recovers failed containers and keeps your applications running smoothly.

Cost-effectiveness

With ECS, you pay only for the resources you use. It optimizes resource allocation and scales based on actual demand, helping to reduce costs.

Security and compliance

ECS integrates with AWS IAM, allowing you to control access to your containers and resources. It also provides encryption options for data in transit and at rest.

Amazon EKS is another service that AWS offers for launching applications on containers. Let’s explore how it differs from Amazon ECS and in which use cases customers generally prefer to go with EKS instead of ECS.

## Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service

Amazon EKS is a fully managed Kubernetes service that simplifies deploying, managing, and scaling containerized applications using Kubernetes on the AWS cloud. EKS eliminates the need for manual setup and configuration of Kubernetes clusters, so developers can focus on their applications rather than the underlying infrastructure. EKS is available with EKS EC2 and Fargate launch types, similar to ECS.

Now you might wonder: why are there two different containerized services, and how do I decide which is best for my use case? Some of the key benefits of EKS include:

Managed Kubernetes control plane

EKS manages the Kubernetes cluster control plane, which includes the API server and etcd persistence database . This eliminates the administrative overhead of managing and scaling the control plane for the customer, ensuring high availability and a reliability guarantee from AWS.

Multi-AZ support

EKS supports running Kubernetes clusters across multiple AZs, providing enhanced availability and fault tolerance. With cluster resources distributed across different AZs, applications running on EKS can tolerate failures and continue to operate seamlessly. The EKS control plane runs in three AZs with support for automatic detection and replacement of unhealthy nodes.

Automated Kubernetes version upgrades

EKS automatically handles Kubernetes version upgrades for the control plane, simplifying the process of staying up to date with the latest features and security patches. This helps ensure that clusters are running on stable, secure Kubernetes versions without requiring manual intervention.

Hybrid deployments

For highly latency-sensitive workloads, EKS on AWS Outposts can be used to operate applications at on-premises data centers. Outposts extends AWS infrastructure, services, and tools to the customer’s personal data center, essentially making it feasible to run EKS workloads there.

Integration with AWS services

EKS seamlessly integrates with various AWS services, enabling developers to leverage the extensive ecosystem of AWS resources and capabilities. It integrates with services like AWS ELB, Amazon VPC, AWS IAM, AWS CloudTrail, and more, providing a unified experience for managing and securing applications.

Scalability and elasticity

With Amazon EKS, scaling Kubernetes clusters to accommodate increased workloads is effortless. It leverages Amazon EC2 instances and ASGs to dynamically scale worker nodes based on demand, or Fargate launch can be used as a serverless option. This allows applications to handle traffic spikes and change resource requirements seamlessly. We can also leverage EC2 spot instances to reduce the cost of EKS clusters or use GPU-optimized instances for high-performance computing.

Security and compliance

EKS incorporates several security features to protect applications and data. It integrates with AWS IAM to control access to cluster resources, supports fine-grained network policies using Amazon VPC, and allows encryption of data at rest using AWS KMS. EKS is compliant with various industry regulations, such as System and Organization Controls (SOC) , PCI DSS , ISO , FedRAMP Moderate , Information Security Registered Assessors Program (IRAP) , Cloud Computing Compliance Controls Catalog (C5) , Korea-Information Security Management System (K-ISMS) , Esquema Nacional de Seguridad (ENS) High , Outsourced Service Provider’s Audit Report (OSPAR) , Health Information Trust Alliance Common Security Framework (HITRUST CSF) , and HIPAA .

Monitoring and logging

EKS provides integrations with popular monitoring and logging services, including Amazon CloudWatch and AWS CloudTrail. These services enable developers to gain insights into cluster performance, monitor resource utilization, and track API calls and events for auditing and troubleshooting purposes.

Ecosystem and community

As an open source platform, Kubernetes has a vibrant ecosystem and community. EKS benefits from this by providing compatibility with Kubernetes-native tools, frameworks, and operators. Developers can leverage these tools to enhance their application’s deployment, management, and observability within the EKS environment.

Your love for open source could be just another reason to choose EKS, where you have complete visibility into the ongoing development and the Kubernetes internal architecture. EKS on AWS offers the benefits of both worlds: open source support as well as offloading of management tasks to AWS, along with easier integration with other AWS services.

# Conclusion

Selecting a compute platform for launching applications could be a difficult choice, so you should clearly lay out all the application requirements or expectations to help you make a wise decision. There is a philosophy of a “two-way door” decision-making process at Amazon that states, “You can always revert your decision if things are not working out as expected.” Similarly, the compute platform can always be reiterated as the application scope or traffic pattern changes for your application. Here are a few recommendations we think will be helpful in deciding on your compute platform:

Flexibility

EC2 offers maximum flexibility to users with customizations at the hardware level in addition to how software applications are deployed. In contrast, AWS Lambda abstracts the resources completely, and customers have to focus only on the code, with restrictions such as a maximum 15-minute invocation time. The higher flexibility of EC2 brings a larger operational overhead for system maintenance, such as OS patching for security issues, figuring out the most efficient instance type for the application, configuring autoscaling policies, deploying applications, and so on.

Learning curve

As we start building and launching applications, familiarity with the platform is another factor to consider. More familiarity means fewer unknowns and quicker application launches. For example, if you’re completely new to any compute platform, it’s very easy to start with Lambda and launch applications in the minimum time possible since you just have to focus on writing code and skip all the headaches of application deployment and maintenance for the required traffic.

Traffic patterns

All compute platforms offered by AWS can operate at high scale. You should understand the requirements in hand and why a specific platform will best serve the business use case and provide cost efficiency. For example, EC2 or ECS EC2 provides more hardware control so could be a better choice for high-latency, sensitive operations or GPU-accelerated computing.

Cost

It’s important to consider the cost of resources in the AWS cloud. The pricing model for each of the compute platforms varies, and there is no direct head-to-head comparison. Cost could depend on traffic patterns, size of workload, or resource selection, such as EC2 instance type, ECS Fargate task size, or Lambda memory configuration. Consider operational overhead as well because eventually people will maintain the operations .

While you may not know the best solution right off the bat, don’t forget that it’s always a two-way-door decision and can be reiterated.

In the next chapter, we’ll explore messaging services such as Amazon SQS, Amazon SNS, and Apache Kafka; workflow orchestration services such as AWS Step Functions and Apache Airflow; application health and monitoring services such as AWS CloudWatch; and application security services such as AWS IAM and Amazon Cognito.
