# Chapter 20. Designing a Video-Processing Pipeline for a Streaming Service

We talked about video uploads and downloads between users on a messaging application in Chapter 19 . To ensure optimal customer experience, there are certain steps we need to take in this video-uploading process, such as compression to reduce the size and transcoding to support different media formats and a wide variety of devices. In this chapter, we’ll focus on building a video-processing pipeline for streaming services like Netflix, Amazon Prime Video, and YouTube. As always, we’ll start with the system requirements and then dive into the details of the different steps involved. The main goal of our design decisions throughout the chapter will be for the video content to be available to viewers in the optimal quality and the minimum time possible. We’ll conclude the chapter by deploying the system on the AWS cloud using AWS media services, and we’ll also touch on some considerations for live streaming large-scale events, such as Thursday Night Football in the US and cricket matches in India.

# System Requirements

The most important requirement of the system is that the video uploaded from production houses (in the case of Netflix or Amazon Prime Video) or users (in the case of YouTube) should be processed in such a way that it is easily accessible to viewers later. The system design will be applicable to any system involving video processing, but we’ll use examples from Netflix’s system.

There are a few considerations we need to clarify before defining the functional requirements of the system:

Does the system limit the size of the file being uploaded? 

There is no hard limit on the file size since video files can be quite large if shot in 4K resolution, so the system doesn’t enforce any size constraints.

Should the system be designed keeping live streaming, video on demand (VoD), or both in mind? 

We’ll focus the discussion on VoD as the main feature of the video-processing pipeline and spend some time on live streaming in the AWS Day 0 architecture discussion.

Can the system support the wide variety of devices that users own, such as Smart TVs, Android phones, iPhones, and tablets?

The system should be able to stream video content to all device types in the most optimal quality possible.

Can the system implement different ML and analytics components for recommendations?

The scope of this chapter is limited to not include ML components in the system architecture.

Let’s talk about the functional and nonfunctional requirements of the system next.

## Functional and Nonfunctional Requirements

Based on the considerations we just covered, we can expect the system to offer the following functional requirements:

- The system allows production houses to upload the media content.
- Video should be available to viewers in different formats per their devices and in different qualities per internet connectivity.
- Videos should be available to viewers in the minimum time possible without too much buffering involved.

Here are the NFRs supported by the system:

- Data should be durable—the system shouldn’t lose any data during execution of the video-processing pipeline.
- The system should be extensible to support any type of encoding in the future.
- Availability is important for the application but not 100% critical. The customers are the production studios uploading the videos, so they can be asked to upload at a later point.

Let’s talk about system scale next.

## System Scale

The key parameter for system scale is the amount of storage space needed to store the content uploaded by video production houses. Along with the original video files, the system creates replicas of the content in compressed form to support different device types and internet bandwidth availability (we’ll cover more details about the architecture in later sections). The content is further processed by breaking it into smaller chunks, so we should be able to come up with optimal server configurations to deploy the end-to-end infrastructure.

According to Netflix stats , there are more than 18,000 titles on the platform. The number is much larger for platforms like YouTube, where users can upload their own videos. YouTube consists of close to 14 billion videos at the time of this writing, and the number continues to increase year by year. There is one notable difference between YouTube and Netflix: the quality of video uploads. Netflix requires content production houses to upload ultra-high-quality videos, but there is no such enforcement on YouTube. Of course, both platforms have different audiences and use cases.

Let’s figure out the storage numbers for our own system based on the assumptions that the system has 30,000 titles and it adds 5,000 new titles every year. The titles can be a combination of movies and TV series (or web series) with multiple episodes. We’ll assume a ratio of 90:10 for movies to TV series, with one series consisting of an average of 10 episodes (there is the possibility of multiple seasons as well). The storage space heavily depends on the type of camera devices used for shooting the video, so we’ll pick an average there:

Total number of videos = 27,000 movies + 3,000 × 10 episodes from series

Average length of video = 90 minutes

Average size of original video = 50 GB

Videos are encoded into different formats to compress them so that they are around a thousand times smaller , contributing to an average size of 50 MB per video. Apart from our main video storage, we need storage for databases to maintain the metadata, such as where the videos are kept in the object storage and other properties related to the content. Of course, the actual video content occupies the major chunk of storage space.

We also need to figure out how frequently the content is accessed from the data storage location. This is important in terms of cloud storage solutions like Amazon S3 where the pricing depends on data transfer rates as well as storage space. For example, Netflix has built a storage wrapper called MezzFS over S3 to reduce download speeds and costs for frequent data access.

Let’s start with the design of the video-processing pipeline.

# Starting with the Design

The first step in designing our video-processing pipeline (which we’ll call our ingestion system hereafter) is uploading videos created by production houses. A video uploader is a platform for production houses to upload their content and then track progress to know when the content is actually available for viewing. The videos are generally shot with high-quality cameras, which means the file sizes are relatively large. The uploads should be resumable from the client’s end to ensure that the video uploads resume from wherever they left off in case of network issues. This functionality is quite similar to how uploads work on systems like Google Drive.

###### Note

Netflix publishes timely engineering blogs to share their architecture and learnings. The content in this chapter is influenced by Netflix’s video-processing blogs; read the blogs for an end-to-end understanding of Netflix’s systems.

The clients are allowed to upload additional metadata along with the source video, such as video thumbnails, video tags, audio tags, and so on. Once the ingestion system has the video, the system runs a video inspection to make sure the video meets the system-defined constraints. If the quality constraints are not met, the production house is asked to reupload the video source files. The inspection is done on the source file by breaking the file into multiple chunks and then inspecting them independently for faster processing, as shown in Figure 20-1 .

[image: image]

###### Figure 20-1. Video source file inspection

A key consideration you might have also realized here is that the entire system works in asynchronous fashion in a series of steps (steps can be sequential or parallel per the use case). Let’s first identify the key steps in the pipeline and then explore each one:

Video encoding

To support various kinds of devices and internet bandwidth availability, the video is encoded into different formats and qualities. All of these encoded videos are stored on the servers, and the customers can be served per their requirements.

Video-quality validation

Quality validation is done after each step in the pipeline to ensure that viewer experience is not impacted.

Content indexing

As the content is processed, multiple tasks are done in parallel, such as extracting images to be used as thumbnails later, extracting various content parameters, and creating an index for offering search capability to users.

Video distribution

The final step is video distribution to users. The video content is cached near user locations using CDNs and served to the users upon request.

Let’s talk about each of these steps in more detail, starting with video encoding.

## Video Encoding

Before we can dig into video encoding, first you need to understand the term codec . Short for compressor/decompressor, codec is a specific algorithm or technique used to compress a video (reducing its size) and later to decompress it when it is actually viewed. We’ll discuss codec in the context of video files, but it’s a general technique and can be applied to any type of file. Some examples of codecs include H.264/Advanced Video Coding (AVC), High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC), and VP9. These codecs require a video container (such as .mp4 , .avi , .mov , etc.) to host the encoded video. Video container formats can vary from device to device. To ensure that the videos can be played on all types of devices, the system should create copies of the videos in all these formats.

Two things apart from format that we need to take into consideration are the video resolution and the bitrate. Bitrate means the number of bits used per second, which helps determine the speed at which chunks can be served on a user’s device from system servers (or CDNs if the content is cached at a nearby location). To take an example of MP4 format, the following are the replicas of the video maintained by the system to serve to customers:

- High quality (high bitrate): 4K, 1080p, 720p
- Medium quality (medium bitrate): 1080p, 720p, 480p
- Low quality (low bitrate): 720p, 480p, 360p, 144p

You may have realized that the system needs to perform a lot of work and definitely needs some parallelization in the processing to make it faster. To work in parallel and make the system more efficient, the source video is broken into small chunks after initial inspection of the video. Creating chunks of the video also makes failure handling easy during the encoding process because the system can easily retry for a smaller chunk, but it is resource- and time-consuming to retry for the entire video.

Let’s consider what our logic should be for breaking the video into chunks. Should the logic be as simple as dividing the video into 30-second chunks, or do we need some special algorithm to decide the chunk size? Let’s dig a little deeper into this. For the moment, forget about the encoding pipeline and think of how content is served to the end users. The goal is to serve the best-quality video with the minimum possible bandwidth. Netflix systems employ multiple mechanisms, such as title-based encoding and shot-based encoding , to ensure that maximum-quality videos are served to users at a lower bandwidth usage. Shot-based encoding improves the overall compression efficiency and is a successor to title-based encoding.

Once the encoding process is completed for all the video chunks, they are independently validated for video quality, sent for encoding again if validation fails, and finally reassembled to perform the quality checks against the source video, as shown in Figure 20-2 . The final encoded video is around one thousand times smaller than the source video.

[image: image]

###### Figure 20-2. Video encoding

The video-encoding system is invoked whenever a new video is uploaded to the system. It can also be used to reencode the video in case more codecs are introduced to support newer devices or some innovation is done in video technology.

Validations for quality are done at every step in the pipeline, so let’s talk about validation techniques next.

## Video-Quality Validation

Video-quality validation is done at every step, and appropriate actions are taken to restore the video quality if necessary, but the most important video-validation metric is the rating given by the viewer. This rating is the most actionable metric for passing the video-validation test.

The validation logic becomes quite important for the encoded videos because these are the final videos used for streaming. The system validates that every generated encoding meets quality expectations. There is a possibility that frame issues were introduced during the parallel chunk encoding, such as incorrect frame boundaries or duplicate or dropped frames.

After the base validation against the encoded and source video, the system tries to evaluate the viewer’s perception if the video was streamed to the user. Video Multimethod Assessment Fusion (VMAF) is one such validation technique deployed by Netflix. VMAF is a perceptual quality assessment algorithm that generates the quality score from the viewer’s perspective, such as how a user would rate the video while viewing. Netflix or any streaming platform wants to ensure optimal viewing experience given the network bandwidth and device constraints. VMAF helps generate quality scores based on all these constraints. Accordingly, we can look for optimizations for further improvements. The whole point of validation at every step of the pipeline is failing fast or detecting issues at the earliest possible moment. This ensures optimal viewer experience and reduces the operational burden on engineers.

The other important factor in quality validation is gathering actual metrics of customer behavior on the device when content is played. The media player running on the customer device captures metrics like times between subsequent delivery of video chunks, error rates, buffer rates, playback start, pause, close, and any custom user actions. These metrics are streamed from the user’s device to the backend analytics system for complete analysis of user behavior and helps fine-tune the quality-control software. The real-time metrics also help us figure out issues with content delivery when the user is streaming a particular video. For example, if there is a high buffer rate on one edge location, then the next set of video chunks are requested from another edge location, which we’ll talk about more in “Content Distribution” . First, let’s discuss content indexing.

## Content Indexing

The video should be available for user search. Let’s take an example of the movie The Dark Knight : the movie should be reflected in the search results if the customers search via any of the keywords, such as the title itself, the director Christopher Nolan, or any of the actors, like Christian Bale or Heath Ledger. Content indexing is done based on a combination of data provided by the production houses and data generated by the system.

The first service that comes to our mind for data indexing is Elasticsearch, which is a great solution when it comes to offering search capabilities. The data should be indexed in Elasticsearch in such a way that users can search via any parameter associated with a video. We discussed Elasticsearch as a solution in Chapters 15 and 18 ; revisit those chapters to review. In the context of Netflix systems , the search capability is built with Elasticsearch and GraphQL federations, and independent teams can own their own criteria for search.

Let’s discuss content distribution next.

## Content Distribution

Once the videos are encoded, the video chunks are stored in the object storage, such as Amazon S3, and should be available for user consumption. To ensure that content reaches the audience with minimum latency, the content is distributed to users’ nearby locations via CDNs. Let’s take one step back and discuss storage on the system servers; then, we’ll talk about Netflix’s proprietary CDN solution, Open Connect.

Let’s think from a user’s standpoint about how the user will receive video streams once they press play for a specific video. The encoded video chunks are stored in S3, but we need some kind of metadata layer to store this mapping that can be used later to figure out the locations of videos. Digital rights management (DRM) protection is added to the video chunks, and then the packaged stream is generated from the video chunks for storage.

###### Note

DRM protection helps avoid piracy and copyright theft of any type of content. The content is basically encrypted with specific keys, and only the authenticated users can access the content.

The videos are also sent to the CDN based on region and past analysis of where the content can be viewed by the users. The CDN locations for the cached video content are maintained in a metadata store, which is useful for serving the user queries at a later point. Netflix heavily uses the Cassandra database for such requirements. Our system doesn’t require any relational database capabilities, so we can choose a NoSQL solution like Cassandra or DynamoDB for easier operations. AWS offers Amazon CloudFront as a CDN offering, and similar capabilities are offered by other cloud providers. Netflix takes it to the next level, moving the data much closer to the viewers by placing the content in the ISP’s location on their devices, which are referred to as Open Connect Appliances (OCAs) . Placing content in the ISP’s location benefits both the ISP and Netflix because the bandwidth usage is reduced for fetching the same content over the internet again and again.

There is always a possibility that some users will try to watch rarely accessed movies or TV series, and the content might not be cached on the OCAs in these cases. For these scenarios, the content is moved at that point of time to the user’s nearby location, and the first few frames can take additional time to be visible on the user’s device.

To summarize the overall architecture, the video encoding service pushes the chunks to S3 and the metadata to Cassandra. The cache management service manages the content distribution to OCAs at different locations. From the user’s perspective, once the user clicks the play button for any video, the user’s device connects with the play service to gather the video chunks. The play service determines client details, such as type of device and network conditions, to figure out what type of video chunks should be streamed to the device. The steering service determines the OCAs based on information from the play service and constructs the URLs for the user connections. The user’s device receives these URLs in response and connects with the OCAs to begin video streaming. The client device runs adaptive streaming algorithms to select the best video chunk based on the available network bandwidth. Figure 20-3 shows a high-level view of content distribution by the system and retrieval by the viewers.

[image: image]

###### Figure 20-3. Open Connect data storage and retrieval

We’ve discussed the pipeline in parts; now let’s combine all the steps to come up with the final system architecture and its deployment on the AWS cloud.

# Launching the System on AWS

At a high level, the system is a combination of steps that are executed in sequence and are dependent on the output of the previous step. We discussed a similar architecture in Chapter 15 for the web crawler system; the video-processing system also fits into the criteria of orchestration systems. We can leverage any orchestration frameworks to manage the end-to-end working of the system. Every step in the orchestration cycle is stateless and idempotent, meaning the system doesn’t maintain any state of previous executions and always returns the exact same output for the same input. Let’s start the discussion with the Day 0 architecture.

## Day 0 Architecture

In Part II , we explored multiple AWS services that can meet customers’ requirements for different business use cases. As always, we’ll try to use fully managed AWS services to launch the system quickly, so let’s figure out which services would be helpful in the different steps of the pipeline for our streaming service. To manage the end-to-end orchestration, we can leverage AWS Step Functions as discussed in Chapter 12 , and the storage requirements can be fulfilled by S3 and DynamoDB.

###### Note

We’ve used DynamoDB extensively in Part III for storage requirements since it fits into most of the use cases. In most of the scenarios, multiple databases can fulfill the use case, and we recommend checking out other offerings as well (such as Amazon Keyspaces) based on your expertise.

AWS offers multiple services to support live video streaming , and the most important service for building a video-processing pipeline is AWS Elemental MediaConvert . This service converts source video into multiple formats and makes them available for streaming on different kinds of devices—a core video-encoding task. Elemental MediaConvert takes input as source video, encodes the video into different formats, and stores the encoded videos to S3. For faster streaming, we can leverage Amazon CloudFront as a CDN solution to store videos near users’ locations.

To elaborate on the overall architecture, shown in Figure 20-4 , the video upload system supports video uploading from users and stores videos in S3. Elemental MediaConvert takes videos from S3, converts them into different formats, and again stores the encoded videos to S3. To ensure that content is made available to users based on their locations and interests, the cache management service pushes the content to CloudFront. The entire encoding pipeline is managed by Step Functions, and we’ll leverage DynamoDB for metadata storage.

[image: image]

###### Figure 20-4. Day 0 architecture

We discussed DRM protection in “Content Distribution” and why it’s critical for video-streaming services. AWS Elemental MediaPackage services can help with protecting content and distributing it to CloudFront.

Now, let’s look at the architecture for managing live streaming events with AWS managed services. The video is uploaded directly from the video production sources using AWS Elemental MediaLive. As mentioned, video content produced from high-quality cameras consumes a lot of storage space, and it can take a long time to upload such videos for distribution. The latency is critical in the case of live streaming, and the upload time should be as minimal as possible (Amazon Prime Video targets less than 10 seconds of latency for streaming Thursday Night Football). Elemental MediaLive plays a critical role in achieving low latency and offers video encoding and compression at the source. The high-quality video content is encoded at the source in real time and then uploaded to the cloud for further processing and distribution.

The next technology used for faster uploads is AWS Direct Connect, which ensures that the video streams are uploaded via the AWS global network and don’t face the congestion challenges of the public internet. Visit Chapter 9 to refresh your understanding of Direct Connect and similar networking services.

Once the video stream reaches the AWS cloud, it is consumed by Elemental MediaPackage for content protection and delivery. MediaPackage helps with manifest creation of the video, content protection via DRM such as Google Widevine and Microsoft PlayReady , and content consumption per the device type, such as HTTP Live Streaming (HLS) for Apple devices and MPEG-DASH for Android devices. The content is stored to S3 as origin and then distributed via the CloudFront service to the end viewers. The architecture with live streaming using AWS services is shown in Figure 20-5 .

[image: image]

###### Figure 20-5. Live streaming video-processing pipeline architecture

In Figure 20-5 , we used S3 as a video storage solution. AWS offers the Elemental MediaStore service, which is specifically designed and optimized to store media content and serve the live content with low latency.

Now, let’s scale the Day 0 architecture of the video-processing pipeline.

## Scaling to Millions and Beyond

The most important parameter for scaling the video-processing pipeline is execution time. The system should be able to encode and validate the videos in the minimum possible time and make the videos available for streaming to different device types.

Let’s start with the uppermost layer of the architecture shown in Figure 20-4 . We already discussed the scalability of AWS Step Functions in Chapter 15 ; it doesn’t present any specific bottleneck in scaling. The only point of consideration here is cost. Step Functions pricing is based on the number of state transitions and the type of Step Function (more details are provided in Chapter 12 ), and the cost can grow significantly as the amount of content being loaded onto the system increases over time. Start with Step Functions to get retries and better debugging capabilities out of the box; later, you can evaluate whether you need a custom orchestration workflow engine.

Another managed service we used in the architecture is Elemental MediaConvert for video encoding. It is designed to operate at high scale, and there are no limits enforced by AWS, but the consideration here is control needed for operations. It is a great solution to start with, but you’re dependent on AWS for encoding decisions. We discussed in previous sections that the video chunk size is not fixed but is optimized based on the video type, and the case of running validations is similar. Keeping this in house helps you fully control the implementation logic and removes the dependency on AWS services.

We broke down the video-processing pipeline into a series of steps in “Starting with the Design” . All these steps are executed by independent microservices. This ensures that the services can be scaled and bring in innovation without affecting or blocking other components. We can take a reference from the Netflix architecture for dividing components based on the operations. The following is a list of services, each responsible for a specific set of tasks:

Video upload service

This service handles the video uploads from the content production houses and persists them to S3.

Video inspection service

This service breaks the videos received from the production houses into chunks, inspects the chunks, and flags any issues. This service also extracts metadata from the video chunks, which is used in later stages of the pipeline.

Complexity analysis service

This service runs analysis on the source video to figure out the optimal encoding recipe. It also communicates with the video encoding and quality services for preencoding and quality operations, respectively. The results of the encoding and quality services are persisted so that they can be used in later stages of the pipeline.

Ladder generation service

This service receives the complexity data from the complexity analysis service and creates a bitrate ladder for a given encoding family (H.264, AV1, etc.). The complexity analysis and ladder generation services work together to generate the final encoding recipes, which are later used by the video encoding service.

Video encoding service

This service takes the source video and encoding recipes as input and generates encoded video in the output.

Video validation service

This service runs validations on the encoded video. The validation is done based on expectations specified against the video, such as attributes in the encoding recipe and conformance requirements from the codec specification. Conformance in terms of codec means whether the codec meets defined standards or not.

Video quality service

This service computes quality scores (VMAF) by comparing the source video and the encoded video.

All the services are shown in Figure 20-6 . They are managed by a workflow orchestrator for their operations. The workflow orchestrator (such as Netflix Conductor and Maestro ) sends the required input to a specific service and gathers the output to pass it along to other services in the needed format. The output can be as simple as small metadata or it can be a large file, and accordingly, the workflow orchestrator can decide how the data is shared to other services. For example, the large file can be dumped to S3, and the URL can be shared to the corresponding service.

[image: image]

###### Figure 20-6. Video encoding and distribution at scale

The video distribution services take the encoded videos, apply the packaging, and store them to S3. The videos only make sense if they are combined; this data is maintained in a manifest stored in a metadata database, such as Cassandra or DynamoDB. The cache management service has the responsibility of distributing the data to users’ nearby locations and continuously monitoring the correctness and health of the CDN instances (OCAs, in Netflix’s case). Developing and deploying an architecture similar to Netflix-managed OCAs can bring with it a lot of operational overhead, and we recommend looking into cloud offerings like Amazon CloudFront for content caching. CloudFront is deployed at AWS-managed edge locations in all the major cities and is used by a lot of customers in the media industry.

Origin Shield is another feature offered as part of CloudFront to improve its caching capabilities. As the name suggests, Origin Shield is an additional layer (or shield) in the front of the origin storage, which is helpful for improving the cache hit ratio and reducing the load on the origin. The first points of contact for users via CloudFront are the edge locations, or PoPs. If data is not cached at the edge locations, the request tries to retrieve data from regional caches—also called regional edge caches (RECs) —and finally from the origin if data is missing at the RECs as well. Once the origin shield is introduced, it acts as the caching layer between the origin and other RECs so that if the data is not cached at an REC, it is retrieved from the origin shield, as shown in Figure 20-7 . In a nutshell, the frequently accessed data from the users (the video chunks) is cached at the edge locations, and users are served upon request.

[image: image]

###### Figure 20-7. Amazon CloudFront with Origin Shield

Let’s think more about high-traffic scenarios for content consumption. Streaming video content from an edge location to the user’s location consumes a lot of internet bandwidth, and if the number of users is too large, the high traffic can cause network congestion. Network congestion can lead to degradation in video quality. An architecture like OCAs helps take the content one step closer to the user’s location. There are two other steps we can take to avoid network-congestion scenarios:

- Work with ISPs so that their internal networks are scaled enough and high traffic requirements don’t create network congestion inside their networks.
- Deploy caching appliances inside the ISPs’ networks. The video content is cached on the caching appliances and streamed to user devices on request. This architecture really helps in huge live streaming events: the backend system essentially sends a single stream to the ISP, and then the ISP fans it out to all the connected devices.

The video streams up to the CloudFront edge locations and are delivered on a dedicated AWS backbone network away from usual internet traffic—making them much faster—and then a dedicated peering connection can be established with the ISPs to avoid any network congestion. CloudFront also launched embedded PoPs to directly cache the content at the ISPs’ facilities similar to Netflix-managed OCAs. The embedded PoPs are designed to have low power consumption and 128 TB of storage per appliance, and they offer high throughput of up to 70 Gbps.

One of the important aspects for application deployment and management is monitoring—this is needed from Day 0 to ensure good system health. We have touched on using Amazon CloudWatch and its features for managing application logs, metrics, and alerts. The architecture presented in Figure 20-6 consists of multiple microservices, and problems can occur in any of them. An orchestration system like AWS Step Functions helps with figuring out the exact step where the state machine failed using error messages.

With respect to the general architecture of systems, the request to a front-facing application can span multiple systems in the distributed environment to gather a response. Proper request tracing in a distributed environment makes debugging issues easier and faster. This becomes very important when we want to figure out any streaming issues later down the line—the engineers will need to debug multiple services, making it very difficult to coordinate across the teams. We can use tools like AWS X-Ray , Zipkin , and OpenTracing to trace the application requests in a distributed system architecture. The key design principle in implementing distributed tracing is using the same request ID (a unique identifier to process a request received by service) across the applications. An application should pass the request ID as part of headers, and the receiving service should use it for processing the request.

## Day N Architecture

We’ll expand on the ideas in the previous section to get a view of the deployment of microservices in the AWS cloud. The architecture of the video-processing pipeline will be similar to the architectures discussed in Chapter 15 , using AWS Step Functions to orchestrate the workflows with an additional video-upload component to trigger the workflow. Let’s expand the architecture from Figure 20-6 with the following steps for end-to-end orchestration on AWS:

1. Content production houses upload videos via the video upload service, which saves the video file to S3.
2. Upload completion on S3 triggers the Step Functions workflow to invoke a series of microservices to perform specific actions. The event trigger can be configured using Amazon EventBridge on S3 “object created” actions.
3. The first service invoked is the video inspection service, and then other services, such as the complexity analysis and video encoding services, are invoked as described previously. The output of these services is used as a trigger point for invoking the next service.

Figure 20-8 shows all the microservices of the video-processing pipeline in a single EKS cluster. There is no hard recommendation for choosing separate EKS clusters versus a single cluster; it heavily depends on factors like scale, need for separation, and compliance constraints, as discussed in Chapter 14 . The diagram shows a simple deployment representation for clarity, but the service EKS Pods are deployed in different AZs with autoscaling enabled to ensure the reliability and availability of the system. Considering Netflix or YouTube’s scale for content production, we recommend hosting separate EKS clusters because they will be owned by independent teams and this will ensure maximum resource separation.

[image: A diagram of a computer

Description automatically generated]

###### Figure 20-8. Day N architecture

Another paradigm followed for the EKS deployments is creating separate namespaces to deploy the services. Creating different namespaces gives a clear boundary for resource separation used by the services, although the overall control plane still uses the common resource pool. Revisit Chapter 7 for more insights into Kubernetes architecture.

# Conclusion

This chapter discussed the architecture of video-processing or ingestion systems for platforms that produce online content, such as Netflix, Amazon Prime Video, and YouTube. The most important takeaway from our review of the overall architecture, which should be applied as a general principle for architecting any new system, is fail-fast behavior. If the system can identify issues at the earliest stage possible, that reduces the touchpoints in the overall system and makes debugging much faster. We’ve implemented quality checks in all stages of the video-processing pipeline to ensure optimal quality of video.

In Chapter 1 , we discussed fallacies in making assumptions about distributed systems, such as infinite network bandwidth availability. Architectures like the video-processing pipeline and content distribution at a large scale lead us to think about these fallacies in more depth. For example, the problem of network congestion is solved by moving content to the user’s nearest possible location and storing it there for distribution.

This chapter introduced you to an asynchronous, event-driven system where execution latency to the milliseconds level is important but not critical. In the next chapter, we’ll explore the architecture of an online stock-trading application, which is a real-time, latency-critical system.

[image: ]

### System Design on AWS

Jayanth Kumar , Mandeep Singh
Published by O'Reilly Media, Inc.20% completeContent Progress 20% completedApprox. 15 hours left

1. Foreword queue 100% complete checkmark circle
2. Preface queue 100% complete checkmark circle
3. I. System Design Basics queue 100% complete checkmark circle
4. 1. System Design Trade-offs and Guidelines queue 54% complete
5. 2. Storage Types and Relational Stores queue 1% complete
6. 3. Nonrelational Stores queue 100% complete checkmark circle
7. 4. Caching Policies and Strategies queue 2% complete
8. 5. Load Balancing Approaches and Techniques queue 3% complete
9. 6. Communication Networks and Protocols queue 2% complete
10. 7. Containerization, Orchestration, and Deployments queue 2% complete
11. 8. Architectural Designs and Patterns queue 1% complete
12. II. Diving Deep into AWS Services queue
13. 9. AWS Network Services queue 2% complete
14. 10. AWS Storage Services queue 1% complete
15. 11. AWS Compute Services queue 3% complete
16. 12. AWS Messaging, Orchestration, Monitoring, and Access Management Services queue 100% complete checkmark circle
17. 13. Big Data, Analytics, and Machine Learning Services queue
18. III. System Design Use Cases queue
19. 14. Designing a URL Shortener Service queue 2% complete
20. 15. Designing a Web Crawler and Search Engine queue 1% complete
21. 16. Designing a Social Network and Newsfeed System queue 2% complete
22. 17. Designing an Online Game Leaderboard queue 2% complete
23. 18. Designing a Hotel Reservation System queue 2% complete
24. 19. Designing a Chat Application queue 100% complete checkmark circle
25. 20. Designing a Video-Processing Pipeline for a Streaming Service queue System Requirements Show More Items Starting with the Design Show More Items Launching the System on AWS Show More Items Conclusion
26. 21. Designing an Online Stock-Trading Platform queue
27. Index queue
28. About the Authors queue
