# Chapter 1. Security

# 1.0 Introduction

The average cost of a data breach in 2021 reached a new high of USD 4.24 million as reported by the [IBM/Ponemon Institute Report](https://oreil.ly/YayAP). When you choose to run your applications in the cloud, you trust AWS to provide a secure infrastructure that runs cloud services so that you can focus on your own innovation and value-added activities.

But security in the cloud is a [shared responsibility](https://oreil.ly/4Sv24) between you and AWS. You are responsible for the configuration of things like AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) policies, Amazon EC2 security groups, and host based firewalls. In other words, the security _of_ the hardware and software platform that make up the AWS cloud is an AWS responsibility. The security of software and configurations that you implement _in_ your AWS account(s) are your responsibility.

As you deploy cloud resources in AWS and apply configuration, it is critical to understand the security settings required to maintain a secure environment. This chapter’s recipes include best practices and use cases focused on security. As security is a part of everything, you will use these recipes in conjunction with other recipes and chapters in this book. For example, you will see usage of AWS Systems Manager Session Manager used throughout the book when connecting to your EC2 instances. These foundational security recipes will give you the tools you need to build secure solutions on AWS.

In addition to the content in this chapter, so many great resources are available for you to dive deeper into security topics on AWS. [“The Fundamentals of AWS Cloud Security”](https://oreil.ly/7rDIX), presented at the 2019 AWS security conference re:Inforce, gives a great overview. A more advanced talk, [“Encryption: It Was the Best of Controls, It Was the Worst of Controls”](https://oreil.ly/qnO16), from AWS re:Invent, explores encryption scenarios explained in detail.

###### Tip

AWS publishes a [best practices guide](https://oreil.ly/BZQRt) for securing your account, and all AWS account holders should be familiar with the best practices as they continue to evolve.

###### Warning

We cover important security topics in this chapter. It is not possible to cover every topic as the list of services and configurations (with respect to security on AWS) continues to grow and evolve. AWS keeps its [Best Practices for Security, Identity, and Compliance web page](https://oreil.ly/Us5oz) up-to-date.

## Workstation Configuration

You will need a few things installed to be ready for the recipes in this chapter.

### General setup

Follow the [“General workstation setup steps for CLI recipes”](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/preface01.html#general_workstation_setup_steps_for_cli) to validate your configuration and set up the required environment variables. Then, clone the chapter code repository:
    
    
    git clone https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Security

# 1.1 Creating and Assuming an IAM Role for Developer Access

## Problem

To ensure that you are not always using administrative permissions, you need to create an IAM role for development use in your AWS account.

## Solution

Create a role using an IAM policy that will allow the role to be assumed later. Attach the AWS managed `PowerUserAccess` IAM policy to the role (see [Figure 1-1](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#create_rolecomma_attach_policycomma_ass)).

###### Figure 1-1. Create role, attach policy, and assume role

### Steps

  1. Create a file named _assume-role-policy-template.json_ with the following content. This will allow an IAM principal to assume the role you will create next (file provided in the repository):
         
         {
           "Version": "2012-10-17",
           "Statement": [
             {
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Principal": {
                 "AWS": "PRINCIPAL_ARN"
               },
               "Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
             }
           ]
         }

###### Tip

If you are using an IAM user, and you delete and re-create the IAM user, this policy will not continue to work because of the way that the IAM service helps mitigate the risk of privilege escalation. For more information, see the [Note in the IAM documentation](https://oreil.ly/wR02t) about this.

  2. Retrieve the [ARN](https://oreil.ly/BDayp) for your user and set it as a variable:
         
         PRINCIPAL_ARN=$(aws sts get-caller-identity --query Arn --output text)

  3. Use the `sed` command to replace _`PRINCIPAL_ARN`_ in the _assume-role-policy-template.json_ file and generate the _assume-role-policy.json_ file:
         
         sed -e "s|PRINCIPAL_ARN|${PRINCIPAL_ARN}|g" \
              assume-role-policy-template.json > assume-role-policy.json

  4. Create a role and specify the assume role policy file:
         
         ROLE_ARN=$(aws iam create-role --role-name AWSCookbook101Role \
              --assume-role-policy-document file://assume-role-policy.json \
              --output text --query Role.Arn)

  5. Attach the AWS managed `PowerUserAccess` policy to the role:
         
         aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name AWSCookbook101Role \
              --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/PowerUserAccess

###### Note

AWS provides [access policies for common job functions](https://oreil.ly/iyKFx) for your convenience. These policies may be a good starting point for you to delegate user access to your account for specific job functions; however, it is best to define a least-privilege policy for your own specific requirements for every access need.

#### Validation checks

Assume the role:
    
    
    aws sts assume-role --role-arn $ROLE_ARN \
         --role-session-name AWSCookbook101

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {
      "Credentials": {
        "AccessKeyId": "<snip>",
        "SecretAccessKey": "<snip>",
        "SessionToken": "<snip>",
        "Expiration": "2021-09-12T23:34:56+00:00"
      },
      "AssumedRoleUser": {
        "AssumedRoleId": "EXAMPLE:AWSCookbook101",
        "Arn": "arn:aws:sts::11111111111:assumed-role/AWSCookbook101Role/AWSCookbook101"
      }
    }

###### Tip

The [AssumeRole API](https://oreil.ly/dX1je) returns a set of temporary credentials for a role session from the [AWS Security Token Service](https://oreil.ly/AdUrq) (STS) to the caller as long as the permissions in the `AssumeRole` policy for the role allow. All IAM roles have an `AssumeRole` policy associated with them. You can use the output of this to [configure the credentials for the AWS CLI](https://oreil.ly/F7ril); [set the AccessKey, SecretAccessKey, and SessionToken as environment variables](https://oreil.ly/UWNWd); and also assume the role in the AWS Console using the [Switch Role](https://oreil.ly/dSfuG) feature. When your applications need to make AWS API calls, the AWS SDK for your programming language of choice handles this for them.

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Security).

## Discussion

Using administrative access for routine development tasks is not a security best practice. Giving unneeded permissions can result in unauthorized actions being performed. Using the `PowerUserAccess` AWS managed policy for development purposes is a better alternative to start rather than using `AdministratorAccess`. Later, you should define your own [customer managed policy](https://oreil.ly/hfQ3p) granting only the specific actions for your needs. For example, if you need to log in often to check the status of your EC2 instances, you can create a read-only policy for this purpose and attach it to a role. Similarly, you can create a role for billing access and use it to access the AWS Billing console only. The more you practice using the [principle of least privilege](https://oreil.ly/jMW6h), the more security will become a natural part of what you do.

You used an IAM user in this recipe to perform the steps. If you are using an AWS account that leverages [federation](https://oreil.ly/hmUw3) for access (e.g., a sandbox or development AWS account at your employer), you should use temporary credentials from the AWS STS rather than an IAM user. This type of access uses time-based tokens that expire after an amount of time, rather than “long-lived” credentials like access keys or passwords. When you performed the `AssumeRole` in the validation steps, you called the STS service for temporary credentials. To help with frequent `AssumeRole` operations, the AWS CLI supports [named profiles](https://oreil.ly/fZSQ9) that can automatically assume and refresh your temporary credentials for your role when you specify the `role_arn` parameter in the named profile.

###### Tip

You can require multi-factor authentication (MFA) as a condition within the `AssumeRole` policies you create. This would allow the role to be assumed only by an identity that has been authenticated with MFA. For more information about requiring MFA for `AssumeRole`, see [the support document](https://oreil.ly/djRQI).

See [Recipe 9.4](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#setting_up_email_alerts_for_root_login) to create an alert when a root login occurs.

###### Tip

You can grant cross-account access to your AWS resources. The resource you define in the policy in this recipe would reference the AWS account and principal within that account that you would like to delegate access to. You should always use an `ExternalID` when enabling cross-account access. For more information, see the [official tutorial for cross-account access](https://oreil.ly/wwlF4).

### Challenge

Create additional IAM roles for each of the AWS managed policies for job functions (e.g., billing, database administrator, networking, etc.)

# 1.2 Generating a Least Privilege IAM Policy Based on Access Patterns

## Problem

You would like to implement least privilege access for your user and scope down the permissions to allow access to only the services, resources, and actions you need to use in your AWS account.

## Solution

Use the IAM Access Analyzer in the IAM console to generate an IAM policy based on the CloudTrail activity in your AWS account, as shown in [Figure 1-2](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#iam_access_analyzer_workflow).

###### Figure 1-2. IAM Access Analyzer workflow

### Prerequisite

  * CloudTrail logging enabled for your account to a configured S3 bucket (see [Recipe 9.3](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#enabling_cloudtrail_logging_for_your_aw))

### Steps

  1. Navigate to the [IAM console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/iam) and select your IAM role or IAM user that you would like to generate a policy for.

  2. On the Permissions tab (the default active tab when viewing your principal), scroll to the bottom, expand the “Generate policy based on CloudTrail events” section, and click the “Generate policy” button.

###### Tip

For a quick view of the AWS services accessed from your principal, click the Access Advisor tab and view the service list and access time. While the IAM Access Advisor is not as powerful as the Access Analyzer, it can be helpful when auditing or troubleshooting IAM principals in your AWS account.

  3. Select the time period of CloudTrail events you would like to evaluate, select your CloudTrail trail, choose your Region (or select “All regions”), and choose “Create and use a new service role.” IAM Access Analyzer will create a role for the service to use for read access to your trail that you selected. Finally, click “Generate policy.” See [Figure 1-3](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#generate_policy_in_the_iam_access_analy) for an example.

###### Figure 1-3. Generating a policy in the IAM Access Analyzer configuration

###### Note

The role creation can take up to 30 seconds. Once the role is created, the policy generation will take an amount of time depending on how much activity is in your CloudTrail trail.

  4. Once the analyzer has completed, scroll to the bottom of the permissions tab and click “View generated policy,” as shown in [Figure 1-4](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#view_generated_policy).

###### Figure 1-4. Viewing the generated policy

  5. Click Next, and you will see a generated policy in JSON format that is based on the activity that your IAM principal has made. You can edit this policy in the interface if you wish to add additional permissions. Click Next again, choose a name, and you can deploy this generated policy as an IAM policy.

You should see a generated IAM policy in the IAM console similar to this:
         
         {
           "Version": "2012-10-17",
           "Statement": [
             {
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Action": [
                 "access-analyzer:ListPolicyGenerations",
                 "cloudtrail:DescribeTrails",
                 "cloudtrail:LookupEvents",
                 "iam:GetAccountPasswordPolicy",
                 "iam:GetAccountSummary",
                 "iam:GetServiceLastAccessedDetails",
                 "iam:ListAccountAliases",
                 "iam:ListGroups",
                 "iam:ListMFADevices",
                 "iam:ListUsers",
                 "s3:ListAllMyBuckets",
                 "sts:GetCallerIdentity"
               ],
               "Resource": "*"
             }, ...
         }

#### Validation checks

Create a new IAM user or role and attach the newly created IAM policy to it. Perform an action granted by the policy to verify that the policy allows your IAM principal to perform the actions that you need it to.

## Discussion

You should always seek to implement least privilege IAM policies when you are scoping them for your users and applications. Oftentimes, you might not know exactly what permissions you may need when you start. With IAM Access Analyzer, you can start by granting your users and applications a larger scope in a development environment, enable CloudTrail logging ([Recipe 9.3](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#enabling_cloudtrail_logging_for_your_aw)), and then run IAM Access Analyzer after you have a window of time that provides a good representation of the usual activity (choose this time period in the Access Analyzer configuration as you did in step 3). The generated policy will contain all of the necessary permissions to allow your application or users to work as they did during that time period that you chose to analyze, helping you implement the [principle of least privilege](https://oreil.ly/jMW6h).

###### Note

You should also be aware of the [list of services](https://oreil.ly/KPEFh) that Access Analyzer supports.

### Challenge

Use the IAM Policy Simulator (see [Recipe 1.4](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#testing_iam_policies_with_the_iam_polic)) on the generated policy to verify that the policy contains the access you need.

# 1.3 Enforcing IAM User Password Policies in Your AWS Account

###### Note

Special thanks to Gaurav Raje for his contribution to this recipe.

## Problem

Your security policy requires that you must enforce a password policy for all the users within your AWS account. The password policy sets a 90-day expiration, and passwords must be made up of a minimum of 32 characters including lowercase and uppercase letters, numbers, and symbols.

## Solution

Set a password policy for IAM users in your AWS account. Create an IAM group, an IAM user, and add the user to the group to verify that the policy is being enforced (see [Figure 1-5](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#using_password_policies_with_iam_users)).

###### Figure 1-5. Using password policies with IAM users

###### Note

If your organization has a central user directory, we recommend using identity federation to access your AWS accounts using [AWS Single Sign-On (SSO)](https://aws.amazon.com/single-sign-on) rather than create individual IAM users and groups. Federation allows you to use an identity provider (IdP) where you already maintain users and groups. AWS publishes a [guide](https://aws.amazon.com/identity/federation) that explains federated access configurations available. You can follow [Recipe 9.6](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#setting_up_aws_organizations_and_aws_si) to enable AWS SSO for your account even if you do not have an IdP available (AWS SSO provides a directory you can use by default).

### Steps

  1. Set an IAM password policy using the AWS CLI to require lowercase and uppercase letters, symbols, and numbers. The policy should indicate a minimum length of 32 characters, a maximum password age of 90 days, and password reuse prevented:
         
         aws iam update-account-password-policy \
              --minimum-password-length 32 \
              --require-symbols \
              --require-numbers \
              --require-uppercase-characters \
              --require-lowercase-characters \
              --allow-users-to-change-password \
              --max-password-age 90 \
              --password-reuse-prevention true

  2. Create an IAM group:
         
         aws iam create-group --group-name AWSCookbook103Group

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "Group": {
             "Path": "/",
             "GroupName": "AWSCookbook103Group",
             "GroupId": "<snip>",
             "Arn": "arn:aws:iam::111111111111:group/AWSCookbook103Group",
             "CreateDate": "2021-11-06T19:26:01+00:00"
           }
         }

  3. Attach the `ReadOnlyAccess` policy to the group:
         
         aws iam attach-group-policy --group-name AWSCookbook103Group \
              --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AWSBillingReadOnlyAccess

###### Tip

It is best to attach policies to groups and not directly to users. As the number of users grows, it is easier to use IAM groups to delegate permissions for manageability. This also helps to meet compliance for standards like [CIS Level 1](https://oreil.ly/i211Q).

  4. Create an IAM user:
         
         aws iam create-user --user-name awscookbook103user

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "User": {
             "Path": "/",
             "UserName": "awscookbook103user",
             "UserId": "<snip>",
             "Arn": "arn:aws:iam::111111111111:user/awscookbook103user",
             "CreateDate": "2021-11-06T21:01:47+00:00"
           }
         }

  5. Use Secrets Manager to generate a password that conforms to your password policy:
         
         RANDOM_STRING=$(aws secretsmanager get-random-password \
         --password-length 32 --require-each-included-type \
         --output text \
         --query RandomPassword)

  6. Create a login profile for the user that specifies a password:
         
         aws iam create-login-profile --user-name awscookbook103user \
              --password $RANDOM_STRING

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "LoginProfile": {
             "UserName": "awscookbook103user",
             "CreateDate": "2021-11-06T21:11:43+00:00",
             "PasswordResetRequired": false
           }
         }

  7. Add the user to the group you created for billing view-only access:
         
         aws iam add-user-to-group --group-name AWSCookbook103Group \
              --user-name awscookbook103user

#### Validation checks

Verify that the password policy you set is now active:
    
    
    aws iam get-account-password-policy

You should see output similar to:
    
    
    {
      "PasswordPolicy": {
        "MinimumPasswordLength": 32,
        "RequireSymbols": true,
        "RequireNumbers": true,
        "RequireUppercaseCharacters": true,
        "RequireLowercaseCharacters": true,
        "AllowUsersToChangePassword": true,
        "ExpirePasswords": true,
        "MaxPasswordAge": 90,
        "PasswordReusePrevention": 1
      }
    }

Try to create a new user by using the AWS CLI with a password that violates the password policy. AWS will not allow you to create such a user:
    
    
    aws iam create-user --user-name awscookbook103user2

Use Secrets Manager to generate a password that does not adhere to your password policy:
    
    
    RANDOM_STRING2=$(aws secretsmanager get-random-password \
    --password-length 16 --require-each-included-type \
    --output text \
    --query RandomPassword)

Create a login profile for the user that specifies the password:
    
    
    aws iam create-login-profile --user-name awscookbook103user2 \
    --password $RANDOM_STRING2

This command should fail and you should see output similar to:
    
    
    An error occurred (PasswordPolicyViolation) when calling the CreateLoginProfile
    operation: Password should have a minimum length of 32

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Security).

## Discussion

For users logging in with passwords, AWS allows administrators to enforce password policies to their accounts that conform to the security requirements of your organization. This way, administrators can ensure that individual users don’t compromise the security of the organization by choosing weak passwords or by not regularly changing their passwords.

###### Tip

Multi-factor authentication is encouraged for IAM users. You can use a software-based virtual MFA device or a hardware device for a second factor on IAM users. AWS keeps an updated list of supported [devices](https://aws.amazon.com/iam/features/mfa).

Multi-factor authentication is a great way to add another layer of security on top of existing password-based security. It combines “what you know” and “what you have”; so, in cases where your password might be exposed to a malicious third-party actor, they would still need the additional factor to authenticate.

### Challenge

Download the [credential report](https://oreil.ly/GFTke) to analyze the IAM users and the password ages in your account.

# 1.4 Testing IAM Policies with the IAM Policy Simulator

## Problem

You have an IAM policy that you would like to put into use but would like to test its effectiveness first.

## Solution

Attach an IAM policy to an IAM role and simulate actions with the IAM Policy Simulator, as shown in [Figure 1-6](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#simulating_iam_policies_attached_to_an).

###### Figure 1-6. Simulating IAM policies attached to an IAM role

### Steps

  1. Create a file called _assume-role-policy.json_ with the following content (file provided in the repository):
         
         {
           "Version": "2012-10-17",
           "Statement": [
             {
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Principal": {
                 "Service": "ec2.amazonaws.com"
               },
               "Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
             }
           ]
         }

  2. Create an IAM role using the _assume-role-policy.json_ file:
         
         aws iam create-role --assume-role-policy-document \
              file://assume-role-policy.json --role-name AWSCookbook104IamRole

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "Role": {
           "Path": "/",
           "RoleName": "AWSCookbook104IamRole",
           "RoleId": "<<UniqueID>>",
           "Arn": "arn:aws:iam::111111111111:role/AWSCookbook104IamRole",
           "CreateDate": "2021-09-22T23:37:44+00:00",
           "AssumeRolePolicyDocument": {
             "Version": "2012-10-17",
             "Statement": [
             ...

  3. Attach the IAM managed policy for `AmazonEC2ReadOnlyAccess` to the IAM role:
         
         aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name AWSCookbook104IamRole \
              --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEC2ReadOnlyAccess

###### Tip

You can find a list of all the actions, resources, and condition keys for EC2 in this AWS [article](https://oreil.ly/EjuR3). The IAM [global condition context keys](https://oreil.ly/IUVkw) are also useful in authoring fine-grained policies.

#### Validation checks

Simulate the effect of the IAM policy you are using, testing several different types of actions on the EC2 service.

Test the `ec2:CreateInternetGateway` action:
    
    
    aws iam simulate-principal-policy \
         --policy-source-arn arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ARN:role/AWSCookbook104IamRole \
         --action-names ec2:CreateInternetGateway

You should see output similar to the following (note the `EvalDecision`):
    
    
    {
      "EvaluationResults": [
      {
        "EvalActionName": "ec2:CreateInternetGateway",
        "EvalResourceName": "*",
        **"EvalDecision": "implicitDeny",**
        "MatchedStatements": [],
        "MissingContextValues": []
      }
      ]
    }

###### Note

Since you attached only the AWS managed `AmazonEC2ReadOnlyAccess` IAM policy to the role in this recipe, you will see an implicit deny for the `CreateInternetGateway` action. This is expected behavior. `AmazonEC2ReadOnlyAccess` does not grant any “create” capabilities for the EC2 service.

Test the `ec2:DescribeInstances` action:
    
    
    aws iam simulate-principal-policy \
         --policy-source-arn arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ARN:role/AWSCookbook104IamRole \
         --action-names ec2:DescribeInstances

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {
      "EvaluationResults": [
      {
        "EvalActionName": "ec2:DescribeInstances",
        "EvalResourceName": "*",
        "EvalDecision": "allowed",
        "MatchedStatements": [
          {
          "SourcePolicyId": "AmazonEC2ReadOnlyAccess",
          "SourcePolicyType": "IAM Policy",
          "StartPosition": {
            "Line": 3,
            "Column": 17
          },
          "EndPosition": {
            "Line": 8,
            "Column": 6
          }
          }
        ],
        "MissingContextValues": []
      }
      ]
    }

###### Note

The `AmazonEC2ReadOnlyAccess` policy allows read operations on the EC2 service, so the `DescribeInstances` operation succeeds when you simulate this action.

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Security).

## Discussion

[IAM policies](https://oreil.ly/uy1uB) let you define permissions for managing access in AWS. Policies can be attached to principals that allow you to grant (or deny) permissions to resources, users, groups and services. It is always best to scope your policies to the minimal set of permissions required as a security best practice. The [IAM Policy Simulator](https://oreil.ly/9qscF) can be extremely helpful when designing and managing your own IAM policies for least-privileged access.

The IAM Policy Simulator also exposes a web interface you can use to test and troubleshoot IAM policies and understand their net effect with the policy you define. You can test all the policies or a subset of policies that you have attached to users, groups, and roles.

###### Tip

The IAM Policy Simulator can help you simulate the effect of the following:

  * Identity-based policies

  * IAM permissions boundaries

  * AWS Organizations service control policies (SCPs)

  * Resource-based policies

After you review the Policy Simulator results, you can add additional statements to your policies that either solve your issue (from a troubleshooting standpoint) or attach newly created policies to users, groups, and roles with the confidence that the net effect of the policy was what you intended.

###### Note

To help you easily build IAM policies from scratch, AWS provides the [AWS Policy Generator](https://oreil.ly/Ny8HI).

### Challenge

Simulate the effect of a permissions boundary on an IAM principal (see [Recipe 1.5](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#delegating_iam_administrative_capabilit)).

# 1.5 Delegating IAM Administrative Capabilities Using Permissions Boundaries

## Problem

You need to grant team members the ability to deploy Lambda functions and create IAM roles for them. You need to limit the effective permissions of the IAM roles created so that they allow only actions needed by the function.

## Solution

Create a [permissions boundary](https://oreil.ly/dtZ7X) policy, create an IAM role for Lambda developers, create an IAM policy that specifies the boundary policy, and attach the policy to the role you created. [Figure 1-7](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#effective_permissions_of_identity_based) illustrates the effective permissions of the identity-based policy with the permissions boundary.

###### Figure 1-7. Effective permissions of identity-based policy with permissions boundary

### Prerequisite

  * An IAM user or federated identity for your AWS account with administrative privileges (follow the [AWS guide for creating your first IAM admin user and user group](https://oreil.ly/2MPmL)).

### Steps

  1. Create a file named _assume-role-policy-template.json_ with the following content (file provided in the repository):
         
         {
           "Version": "2012-10-17",
           "Statement": [
             {
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Principal": {
                 "AWS": "PRINCIPAL_ARN"
               },
               "Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
             }
           ]
         }

  2. Retrieve the ARN for your user and set it as a variable:
         
         PRINCIPAL_ARN=$(aws sts get-caller-identity --query Arn --output text)

  3. Use the `sed` command to replace _`PRINCIPAL_ARN`_ in the _assume-role-policy-template.json_ file that we provided in the repository and generate the _assume-role-policy.json_ file:
         
         sed -e "s|PRINCIPAL_ARN|${PRINCIPAL_ARN}|g" \
         assume-role-policy-template.json > assume-role-policy.json

###### Note

For the purposes of this recipe, you set the allowed IAM principal to your own user (User 1). To test delegated access, you would set the IAM principal to something else.

  4. Create a role and specify the assume role policy file:
         
         ROLE_ARN=$(aws iam create-role --role-name AWSCookbook105Role \
              --assume-role-policy-document file://assume-role-policy.json \
              --output text --query Role.Arn)

  5. Create a permissions boundary JSON file named _boundary-template.json_ with the following content. This allows specific DynamoDB, S3, and CloudWatch Logs actions (file provided in the repository):
         
         {
           "Version": "2012-10-17",
           "Statement": [
             {
               "Sid": "CreateLogGroup",
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Action": "logs:CreateLogGroup",
               "Resource": "arn:aws:logs:*:AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:*"
             },
             {
               "Sid": "CreateLogStreamandEvents",
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Action": [
                 "logs:CreateLogStream",
                 "logs:PutLogEvents"
               ],
               "Resource": "arn:aws:logs:*:AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:*"
             }, 
             {
               "Sid": "DynamoDBPermissions",
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Action": [
                 "dynamodb:PutItem",
                 "dynamodb:UpdateItem",
                 "dynamodb:DeleteItem"
               ],
               "Resource": "arn:aws:dynamodb:*:AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:table/AWSCookbook*"
             },
             {
               "Sid": "S3Permissions",
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Action": [
                 "s3:GetObject",
                 "s3:PutObject"
               ],
               "Resource": "arn:aws:s3:::AWSCookbook*/*"
             }
           ]
         }

  6. Use the `sed` command to replace _`AWS_ACCOUNT_ID`_ in the _boundary-policy-template.json_ file and generate the _boundary-policy.json_ file:
         
         sed -e "s|AWS_ACCOUNT_ID|${AWS_ACCOUNT_ID}|g" \
              boundary-policy-template.json > boundary-policy.json

  7. Create the permissions boundary policy by using the AWS CLI:
         
         aws iam create-policy --policy-name AWSCookbook105PB \
              --policy-document file://boundary-policy.json

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "Policy": {
             "PolicyName": "AWSCookbook105PB",
             "PolicyId": "EXAMPLE",
             "Arn": "arn:aws:iam::111111111111:policy/AWSCookbook105PB",
             "Path": "/",
             "DefaultVersionId": "v1",
             "AttachmentCount": 0,
             "PermissionsBoundaryUsageCount": 0,
             "IsAttachable": true,
             "CreateDate": "2021-09-24T00:36:53+00:00",
             "UpdateDate": "2021-09-24T00:36:53+00:00"
           }
         }

  8. Create a policy file named _policy-template.json_ for the role (file provided in the repository):
         
         {
           "Version": "2012-10-17",
           "Statement": [
             {
               "Sid": "DenyPBDelete", [](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#c01)
               "Effect": "Deny",
               "Action": "iam:DeleteRolePermissionsBoundary",
               "Resource": "*"
             },
             {
               "Sid": "IAMRead", [](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#c02)
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Action": [
                 "iam:Get*",
                 "iam:List*"
               ],
               "Resource": "*"
             },
             {
                "Sid": "IAMPolicies", [](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#c03)
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Action": [
                 "iam:CreatePolicy",
                 "iam:DeletePolicy",
                 "iam:CreatePolicyVersion",
                 "iam:DeletePolicyVersion",
                 "iam:SetDefaultPolicyVersion"
               ],
               "Resource": "arn:aws:iam::AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:policy/AWSCookbook*"
             },
             {
               "Sid": "IAMRolesWithBoundary", [](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#c04)
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Action": [
                 "iam:CreateRole",
                 "iam:DeleteRole",
                 "iam:PutRolePolicy",
                 "iam:DeleteRolePolicy",
                 "iam:AttachRolePolicy",
                 "iam:DetachRolePolicy"
               ],
               "Resource": [
                 "arn:aws:iam::AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:role/AWSCookbook*"
               ],
               "Condition": {
                 "StringEquals": {
                   "iam:PermissionsBoundary": "arn:aws:iam::AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:policy/AWSCookbook105PB"
                 }
               }
             },
             {
               "Sid": "ServerlessFullAccess", [](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#c05)
               "Effect": "Allow",
                 "Action": [
                 "lambda:*",
                 "logs:*",
                 "dynamodb:*",
                 "s3:*"
               ],
               "Resource": "*"
             },
             {
               "Sid": "PassRole", [](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#c06)
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Action": "iam:PassRole",
               "Resource": "arn:aws:iam::AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:role/AWSCookbook*",
               "Condition": {
                 "StringLikeIfExists": {
                   "iam:PassedToService": "lambda.amazonaws.com"
                 }
               }
             },
             {
               "Sid": "ProtectPB", [](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#c07)
               "Effect": "Deny",
               "Action": [
                 "iam:CreatePolicyVersion",
                 "iam:DeletePolicy",
                 "iam:DeletePolicyVersion",
                 "iam:SetDefaultPolicyVersion"
               ],
               "Resource": [
                 "arn:aws:iam::AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:policy/AWSCookbook105PB",
                 "arn:aws:iam::AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:policy/AWSCookbook105Policy"
               ]
             }
           ]
         }

This custom IAM policy has several statements working together, which define certain permissions for the solution to the problem statement:

[](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#comarker1)
    

`DenyPBDelete`: Explicitly deny the ability to delete permissions boundaries from roles.

[](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#comarker2)
    

`IAMRead`: Allow read-only IAM access to developers to ensure that the IAM console works.

[](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#comarker3)
    

`IAMPolicies`: Allow the creation of IAM policies but force a naming convention prefix `AWSCookbook*`.

[](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#comarker4)
    

`IAMRolesWithBoundary`: Allow the creation and deletion of IAM roles only if they contain the permissions boundary referenced.

[](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#comarker5)
    

`ServerlessFullAccess`: Allow developers to have full access to the AWS Lambda, Amazon DynamoDB, Amazon CloudWatch logs, and Amazon S3 services.

[](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#comarker6)
    

`PassRole`: Allow developers to pass IAM roles to Lambda functions.

[](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#comarker7)
    

`ProtectPB`: Explicitly deny the ability to modify the permissions boundary that bound the roles they create.

  9. Use the `sed` command to replace _`AWS_ACCOUNT_ID`_ in the _policy-template.json_ file and generate the _policy.json_ file:
         
         sed -e "s|AWS_ACCOUNT_ID|${AWS_ACCOUNT_ID}|g" \
              policy-template.json > policy.json

  10. Create the policy for developer access:
         
         aws iam create-policy --policy-name AWSCookbook105Policy \
              --policy-document file://policy.json

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "Policy": {
             "PolicyName": "AWSCookbook105Policy",
             "PolicyId": "EXAMPLE",
             "Arn": "arn:aws:iam::11111111111:policy/AWSCookbook105Policy",
             "Path": "/",
             "DefaultVersionId": "v1",
             "AttachmentCount": 0,
             "PermissionsBoundaryUsageCount": 0,
             "IsAttachable": true,
             "CreateDate": "2021-09-24T00:37:13+00:00",
             "UpdateDate": "2021-09-24T00:37:13+00:00"
           }
         }

  11. Attach the policy to the role you created in step 2:
         
         aws iam attach-role-policy --policy-arn \
              arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:policy/AWSCookbook105Policy \
              --role-name AWSCookbook105Role

#### Validation checks

Assume the role you created and set the output to local variables for the AWS CLI:
    
    
    creds=$(aws --output text sts assume-role --role-arn $ROLE_ARN \
         --role-session-name "AWSCookbook105" | \
         grep CREDENTIALS | cut -d " " -f2,4,5)
    export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=$(echo $creds | cut -d " " -f2)
    export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=$(echo $creds | cut -d " " -f4)
    export AWS_SESSION_TOKEN=$(echo $creds | cut -d " " -f5)

Try to create an IAM role for a Lambda function, create an assume role policy for the Lambda service (_lambda-assume-role-policy.json_):
    
    
    {
      "Version": "2012-10-17",
      "Statement": [
        {
          "Effect": "Allow",
          "Principal": {
            "Service": "lambda.amazonaws.com"
          },
          "Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
        }
      ]
    }

Create the role, specifying the permissions boundary, which conforms to the role-naming standard specified in the policy:
    
    
    TEST_ROLE_1=$(aws iam create-role --role-name AWSCookbook105test1 \
         --assume-role-policy-document \
         file://lambda-assume-role-policy.json \
         --permissions-boundary \
         arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:policy/AWSCookbook105PB \
         --output text --query Role.Arn)

Attach the managed `AmazonDynamoDBFullAccess` policy to the role:
    
    
    aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name AWSCookbook105test1 \
    --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonDynamoDBFullAccess

Attach the managed `CloudWatchFullAccess` policy to the role:
    
    
    aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name AWSCookbook105test1 \
    --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/CloudWatchFullAccess

###### Note

Even though you attached `AmazonDynamoDBFullAccess` and `CloudWatchFullAccess` to the role, the effective permissions of the role are limited by the statements in the permissions boundary you created in step 3. Furthermore, even though you have `s3:GetObject` and `s3:PutObject` defined in the boundary, you have not defined these in the role policy, so the function will not be able to make these calls until you create a policy that allows these actions. When you attach this role to a Lambda function, the Lambda function can perform only the actions allowed in the intersection of the permissions boundary and the role policy (see [Figure 1-7](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#effective_permissions_of_identity_based)).

You can now create a Lambda function specifying this role (`AWSCookbook105test1`) as the execution role to validate the DynamoDB and CloudWatch Logs permissions granted to the function. You can also test the results with the IAM Policy Simulator.

You used an `AssumeRole` and set environment variables to override your local terminal AWS profile to perform these validation checks. To ensure that you revert back to your original authenticated session on the command line, perform the perform the cleanup steps provided at the top of the README file in the repository.

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Security).

###### Note

Be sure to delete your environment variables so that you can regain permissions needed for future recipes:
    
    
    unset AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID
    unset AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
    unset AWS_SESSION_TOKEN

## Discussion

In your quest to implement a least privilege access model for users and applications within AWS, you need to enable developers to create IAM roles that their applications can assume when they need to interact with other AWS services. For example, an AWS Lambda function that needs to access an Amazon DynamoDB table would need a role created to be able to perform operations against the table. As your team scales, instead of your team members coming to you every time they need a role created for a specific purpose, you can enable (but control) them with permissions boundaries, without giving up too much IAM access. The `iam:PermissionsBoundary` condition in the policy that grants the `iam:CreateRole` ensures that the roles created must always include the permissions boundary attached.

Permissions boundaries act as a guardrail and limit privilege escalation. In other words, they limit the maximum effective permissions of an IAM principal created by a delegated administrator by defining what the roles created can do. As shown in [Figure 1-7](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#effective_permissions_of_identity_based), they work in conjunction with the permissions policy (IAM policy) that is attached to an IAM principal (IAM user or role). This prevents the need to grant wide access to an administrator role, prevents privilege escalation, and helps you achieve least privilege access by allowing your team members to quickly iterate and create their own least-privileged roles for their applications.

In this recipe, you may have noticed that we used a naming convention of `AWSCookbook*` on the roles and policies referenced in the permissions boundary policy, which ensures the delegated principals can create roles and policies within this convention. This means that developers can create resources, pass _only_ these roles to services, and also keep a standard naming convention. This is an ideal practice when implementing permissions boundaries. You can develop a naming convention for different teams, applications, and services so that these can all coexist within the same account, yet have different boundaries applied to them based on their requirements, if necessary.

At minimum, you need to keep these four things in mind when building roles that implement permissions boundary guardrails to delegate IAM permissions to nonadministrators:

  1. Allow the creation of IAM customer managed policies: your users can create any policy they wish; they do not have an effect until they are attached to an IAM principal.

  2. Allow IAM role creation with a condition that a permissions boundary must be attached: force all roles created by your team members to include the permission boundary in the role creation.

  3. Allow attachment of policies, but only to roles that have a permissions boundary: do not let users modify existing roles that they may have access to.

  4. Allow `iam:PassRole` to AWS services that your users create roles for: your developers may need to create roles for Amazon EC2 and AWS Lambda, so give them the ability to pass only the roles they create to those services you define.

###### Tip

Permissions boundaries are a powerful, advanced IAM concept that can be challenging to understand. We recommend checking out [the talk](https://oreil.ly/0Smmq) by Brigid Johnson at AWS re:Inforce 2018 to see some real-world examples of IAM policies, roles, and permissions boundaries explained in a practical way.

### Challenge

Extend the permissions boundary to allow roles created to publish to an SQS queue and SNS topic and adjust the policy for the role as well.

# 1.6 Connecting to EC2 Instances Using AWS SSM Session Manager

## Problem

You have an EC2 instance in a private subnet and need to connect to the instance without using SSH over the internet.

## Solution

Create an IAM role, attach the `AmazonSSMManagedInstanceCore` policy, create an EC2 instance profile, attach the IAM role you created to the instance profile, associate the EC2 instance profile to an EC2 instance, and finally, run the `aws ssm start-session` command to connect to the instance. A logical flow of these steps is shown in [Figure 1-8](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#using_session_manager_to_connect_to_an).

###### Figure 1-8. Using Session Manager to connect to an EC2 instance

### Prerequisites

  * Amazon Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) with isolated or private subnets and associated route tables

  * [Required VPC endpoints for AWS Systems Manager](https://oreil.ly/qyNJR)

  * AWS CLI v2 with the [Session Manager plugin installed](https://oreil.ly/ejccM)

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Security).

### Steps

  1. Create a file named _assume-role-policy.json_ with the following content (file provided in the repository):
         
         {
           "Version": "2012-10-17",
           "Statement": [
           {
             "Effect": "Allow",
             "Principal": {
               "Service": "ec2.amazonaws.com"
             },
             "Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
           }
           ]
         }

  2. Create an IAM role with the statement in the provided _assume-role-policy.json_ file using this command:
         
         ROLE_ARN=$(aws iam create-role --role-name AWSCookbook106SSMRole \
              --assume-role-policy-document file://assume-role-policy.json \
              --output text --query Role.Arn)

  3. Attach the `AmazonSSMManagedInstanceCore` managed policy to the role so that the role allows access to AWS Systems Manager:
         
         aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name AWSCookbook106SSMRole \
              --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonSSMManagedInstanceCore

  4. Create an instance profile:
         
         aws iam create-instance-profile \
              --instance-profile-name AWSCookbook106InstanceProfile

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "InstanceProfile": {
             "Path": "/",
             "InstanceProfileName": "AWSCookbook106InstanceProfile",
             "InstanceProfileId": "(RandomString",
             "Arn": "arn:aws:iam::111111111111:instance-profile/AWSCookbook106InstanceProfile",
             "CreateDate": "2021-11-28T20:26:23+00:00",
             "Roles": []
           }
         }

  5. Add the role that you created to the instance profile:
         
         aws iam add-role-to-instance-profile \
              --role-name AWSCookbook106SSMRole \
              --instance-profile-name AWSCookbook106InstanceProfile

###### Note

The EC2 instance profile contains a role that you create. The instance profile association with an instance allows it to define “who I am,” and the role defines “what I am permitted to do.” Both are required by IAM to allow an EC2 instance to communicate with other AWS services using the IAM service. You can get a list of instance profiles in your account by running the `aws iam list-instance-profiles` AWS CLI command.

  6. Query SSM for the latest Amazon Linux 2 AMI ID available in your Region and save it as an environment variable:
         
         AMI_ID=$(aws ssm get-parameters --names \
              /aws/service/ami-amazon-linux-latest/amzn2-ami-hvm-x86_64-gp2 \
              --query 'Parameters[0].[Value]' --output text)

  7. Launch an instance in one of your subnets that references the instance profile you created and also uses a `Name` tag that helps you identify the instance in the console:
         
         INSTANCE_ID=$(aws ec2 run-instances --image-id $AMI_ID \
              --count 1 \
              --instance-type t3.nano \
              --iam-instance-profile Name=AWSCookbook106InstanceProfile \
              --subnet-id $SUBNET_1 \
              --security-group-ids $INSTANCE_SG \
              --metadata-options \
         HttpTokens=required,HttpPutResponseHopLimit=64,HttpEndpoint=enabled \
              --tag-specifications \
              'ResourceType=instance,Tags=[{Key=Name,Value=AWSCookbook106}]' \
              'ResourceType=volume,Tags=[{Key=Name,Value=AWSCookbook106}]' \
              --query Instances[0].InstanceId \
              --output text)

###### Tip

[EC2 instance metadata](https://oreil.ly/DtodI) is a feature you can use within your EC2 instance to access information about your EC2 instance over an HTTP endpoint from the instance itself. This is helpful for scripting and automation via [user data](https://oreil.ly/IMqFC). You should always use the latest version of instance metadata. In step 7, you did this by specifying the `--metadata-options` flag and providing the `HttpTokens=required` option that forces [IMDSv2](https://oreil.ly/KGC4n).

#### Validation checks

Ensure your EC2 instance has registered with SSM. Use the following command to check the status. This command should return the instance ID:
    
    
    aws ssm describe-instance-information \
         --filters Key=ResourceType,Values=EC2Instance \
         --query "InstanceInformationList[].InstanceId" --output text

Connect to the EC2 instance by using SSM Session Manager:
    
    
    aws ssm start-session --target $INSTANCE_ID

You should now be connected to your instance and see a bash prompt. From the bash prompt, run a command to validate you are connected to your EC2 instance by querying the metadata service for an IMDSv2 token and using the token to query metadata for the instance profile associated with the instance:
    
    
    TOKEN=`curl -X PUT "http://169.254.169.254/latest/api/token" -H "X-aws-ec2-metadata-token-ttl-seconds: 21600"`
    curl -H "X-aws-ec2-metadata-token: $TOKEN" http://169.254.169.254/latest/meta-data/iam/info

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {
      "Code" : "Success",
      "LastUpdated" : "2021-09-23T16:03:25Z",
      "InstanceProfileArn" : "arn:aws:iam::111111111111:instance-profile/AWSCookbook106InstanceProfile",
      "InstanceProfileId" : "AIPAZVTINAMEXAMPLE"
    }

Exit the Session Manager session:
    
    
    exit

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Security).

## Discussion

When you use AWS SSM Session Manager to connect to EC2 instances, you eliminate your dependency on Secure Shell (SSH) over the internet for command-line access to your instances. Once you configure Session Manager for your instances, you can instantly connect to a bash shell session on Linux or a PowerShell session for Windows systems.

###### Warning

SSM can log all commands and their output during a session. You can set a preference to stop the logging of sensitive data (e.g., passwords) with this command:
    
    
    stty -echo; read passwd; stty echo;

There is more information in an AWS [article](https://oreil.ly/QJcHr) about logging session activity.

Session Manager works by communicating with the AWS Systems Manager (SSM) API endpoints within the AWS Region you are using over HTTPS (TCP port 443). The agent on your instance registers with the SSM service at boot time. No inbound security group rules are needed for Session Manager functionality. We recommend configuring [VPC Endpoints for Session Manager](https://oreil.ly/vNEZQ) to avoid the need for internet traffic and the cost of Network Address Translation (NAT) gateways.

Here are some examples of the increased security posture Session Manager provides:

  * No internet-facing TCP ports need to be allowed in security groups associated with instances.

  * You can run instances in private (or isolated) subnets without exposing them directly to the internet and still access them for management duties.

  * There is no need to create, associate, and manage SSH keys with instances.

  * There is no need to manage user accounts and passwords on instances.

  * You can delegate access to manage EC2 instances using IAM roles.

###### Note

Any tool like SSM that provides such powerful capabilities must be carefully audited. AWS provides information about [locking down permissions](https://oreil.ly/EQyPf) for the SSM user, and more information about [auditing session activity](https://oreil.ly/aHzbf).

### Challenge

View the logs for a session and create an alert whenever the `rm` command is executed.

# 1.7 Encrypting EBS Volumes Using KMS Keys

## Problem

You need an encryption key for encrypting EBS volumes attached to your EC2 instances in a Region, and you need to rotate the key automatically every 365 days.

## Solution

Create a customer-managed KMS key (CMK), enable yearly rotation of the key, enable EC2 default encryption for EBS volumes in a Region, and specify the KMS key you created (shown in [Figure 1-9](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#create_a_customer_managed_keycomma_enab)).

###### Figure 1-9. Create a customer-managed key, enable rotation, and set default encryption for EC2 using a customer-managed key

### Steps

  1. Create a customer-managed KMS key and store the key ARN as a local variable:
         
         KMS_KEY_ID=$(aws kms create-key --description "AWSCookbook107Key" \
              --output text --query KeyMetadata.KeyId)

  2. Create a key alias to help you refer to the key in other steps:
         
         aws kms create-alias --alias-name alias/AWSCookbook107Key \
              --target-key-id $KMS_KEY_ID

  3. Enable automated rotation of the symmetric key material every 365 days:
         
         aws kms enable-key-rotation --key-id $KMS_KEY_ID

  4. Enable EBS encryption by default for the EC2 service within your current Region:
         
         aws ec2 enable-ebs-encryption-by-default

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
              "EbsEncryptionByDefault": true
         }

  5. Update the default KMS key used for default EBS encryption to your customer-managed key that you created in step 1:
         
         aws ec2 modify-ebs-default-kms-key-id \
              --kms-key-id alias/AWSCookbook107Key

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "KmsKeyId": "arn:aws:kms:us-east-1:111111111111:key/1111111-aaaa-bbbb-222222222"
         }

#### Validation checks

Use the AWS CLI to retrieve the default EBS encryption status for the EC2 service:
    
    
    aws ec2 get-ebs-encryption-by-default

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {
      "EbsEncryptionByDefault": true
    }

Retrieve the KMS key ID used for default encryption:
    
    
    aws ec2 get-ebs-default-kms-key-id

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {
      "KmsKeyId": "arn:aws:kms:us-east-1:1111111111:key/1111111-aaaa-3333-222222222c64b"
    }

Check the automatic rotation status of the key you created:
    
    
    aws kms get-key-rotation-status --key-id $KMS_KEY_ID

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {
      "KeyRotationEnabled": true
    }

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Security).

## Discussion

When you are faced with the challenge of ensuring that all of your newly created EBS volumes are encrypted, the `ebs-encryption-by-default` option comes to the rescue. With this setting enabled, every EC2 instance you launch will by default have its EBS volumes encrypted with the specified KMS key. If you do not specify a KMS key, a default AWS-managed `aws/ebs` KMS key is created and used. If you need to manage the lifecycle of the key or have a requirement specifying that you or your organization must manage the key, customer-managed keys should be used.

Automatic [key rotation](https://oreil.ly/ofr4y) on the KMS service simplifies your approach to key rotation and key lifecycle management.

KMS is a flexible service you can use to implement a variety of data encryption strategies. It supports key policies that you can use to control who has access to the key. These key policies layer on top of your existing IAM policy strategy for added security. You can use KMS keys to encrypt many different types of data at rest within your AWS account, for example:

  * Amazon S3

  * Amazon EC2 EBS volumes

  * Amazon RDS databases and clusters

  * Amazon DynamoDB tables

  * Amazon EFS volumes

  * Amazon FSx file shares

  * And many more

### Challenge 1

Change the key policy on the KMS key to allow access to only your IAM principal and the EC2 service.

### Challenge 2

Create an EBS volume and verify that it is encrypted by using the `aws ec2 describe-volumes` [command](https://oreil.ly/UyOQA).

# 1.8 Storing, Encrypting, and Accessing Passwords Using Secrets Manager

## Problem

You need to give your EC2 instance the ability to securely store and retrieve a database password for your application.

## Solution

Create a password, store the password in Secrets Manager, create an IAM Policy with access to the secret, and grant an EC2 instance profile access to the secret, as shown in [Figure 1-10](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#create_a_secret_and_retrieve_it_via_ect).

###### Figure 1-10. Create a secret and retrieve it via the EC2 instance

### Prerequisites

  * VPC with isolated subnets and associated route tables.

  * EC2 instance deployed. You will need the ability to connect to this for testing.

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the chapter code repository.

### Steps

  1. Create a secret using the AWS CLI:
         
         RANDOM_STRING=$(aws secretsmanager get-random-password \
              --password-length 32 --require-each-included-type \
              --output text \
              --query RandomPassword)

  2. Store it as a new secret in Secrets Manager:
         
         SECRET_ARN=$(aws secretsmanager \
              create-secret --name AWSCookbook108/Secret1 \
              --description "AWSCookbook108 Secret 1" \
              --secret-string $RANDOM_STRING \
              --output text \
              --query ARN)

  3. Create a file called _secret-access-policy-template.json_ that references the secret you created. (file provided in the repository):
         
         {
           "Version": "2012-10-17",
           "Statement": [
             {
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Action": [
                 "secretsmanager:GetResourcePolicy",
                 "secretsmanager:GetSecretValue",
                 "secretsmanager:DescribeSecret",
                 "secretsmanager:ListSecretVersionIds"
               ],
               "Resource": [
                 "SECRET_ARN"
               ]
             },
             {
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Action": "secretsmanager:ListSecrets",
               "Resource": "*"
             }
           ]
         }

  4. Use the `sed` command to replace _`SECRET_ARN`_ in the _secret-access-policy-template.json_ file and generate the _secret-access-policy.json_ file:
         
         sed -e "s|SECRET_ARN|$SECRET_ARN|g" \
              secret-access-policy-template.json > secret-access-policy.json

  5. Create the IAM policy for secret access:
         
         aws iam create-policy --policy-name AWSCookbook108SecretAccess \
              --policy-document file://secret-access-policy.json

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "Policy": {
             "PolicyName": "AWSCookbook108SecretAccess",
             "PolicyId": "(Random String)",
             "Arn": "arn:aws:iam::1111111111:policy/AWSCookbook108SecretAccess",
             "Path": "/",
             "DefaultVersionId": "v1",
             "AttachmentCount": 0,
             "PermissionsBoundaryUsageCount": 0,
             "IsAttachable": true,
             "CreateDate": "2021-11-28T21:25:23+00:00",
             "UpdateDate": "2021-11-28T21:25:23+00:00"
           }
         }

  6. Grant an EC2 instance ability to access the secret by adding the IAM policy you created to the EC2 instance profile’s currently attached IAM role:
         
         aws iam attach-role-policy --policy-arn \
              arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:policy/AWSCookbook108SecretAccess \
              --role-name $ROLE_NAME

#### Validation checks

Connect to the EC2 instance:
    
    
    aws ssm start-session --target $INSTANCE_ID

Set and export your default region:
    
    
    export AWS_DEFAULT_REGION=us-east-1

Retrieve the secret from Secrets Manager from the EC2:
    
    
    aws secretsmanager get-secret-value --secret-id AWSCookbook108/Secret1

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {
      "Name": "AWSCookbook108/Secret1",
      "VersionId": "<string>",
      "SecretString": "<secret value>",
      "VersionStages": [
        "AWSCURRENT"
      ],
      "CreatedDate": 1638221015.646,
      "ARN": "arn:aws:secretsmanager:us-east-1:111111111111:secret:AWSCookbook108/Secret1-<suffix>"
    }</suffix>

Exit the Session Manager session:
    
    
    exit

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Security).

## Discussion

Securely creating, storing, and managing the lifecycle of secrets, like API keys and database passwords, is a fundamental component to a strong security posture in the cloud. You can use Secrets Manager to implement a secrets management strategy that supports your security strategy. You can control who has access to what secrets using IAM policies to ensure the secrets you manage are accessible by only the necessary security principals.

Since your EC2 instance uses an instance profile, you do not need to store any hard-coded credentials on the instance in order for it to access the secret. The access is granted via the IAM policy attached to the instance profile. Each time you (or your application) access the secret from the EC2 instance, temporary session credentials are obtained from the STS service to allow the `get-secret-value` API call to retrieve the secret. The AWS CLI automates this process of token retrieval when an EC2 instance profile is attached to your instance. You can also use the AWS SDK within your applications to achieve this functionality.

Some additional benefits to using Secrets Manager include the following:

  * Encrypting secrets with KMS keys that you create and manage

  * Auditing access to secrets through CloudTrail

  * Automating secret rotation using Lambda

  * Granting access to other users, roles, and services like EC2 and Lambda

  * Replicating secrets to another Region for high availability and disaster recovery purposes

### Challenge

Configure a Lambda function to access the secret securely with an IAM role.

# 1.9 Blocking Public Access for an S3 Bucket

## Problem

You have been alerted by your organization’s security team that an S3 bucket has been incorrectly configured and you need to block public access to it.

## Solution

Apply the Amazon S3 Block Public Access feature to your bucket, and then check the status with the Access Analyzer (see [Figure 1-11](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#blocking_public_access_to_an_sthree_buc)).

###### Tip

AWS provides information on what is considered “public” in an [article on S3 storage](https://oreil.ly/h6Ozf).

###### Figure 1-11. Blocking public access to an S3 bucket

### Prerequisite

  * S3 bucket with publicly available object(s)

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Security).

### Steps

  1. Create an Access Analyzer to use for validation of access:
         
         ANALYZER_ARN=$(aws accessanalyzer create-analyzer \
              --analyzer-name awscookbook109\
              --type ACCOUNT \
              --output text --query arn)

  2. Perform a scan of your S3 bucket with the Access Analyzer:
         
         aws accessanalyzer start-resource-scan \
              --analyzer-arn $ANALYZER_ARN \
              --resource-arn arn:aws:s3:::awscookbook109-$RANDOM_STRING

  3. Get the results of the Access Analyzer scan (it may take about 30 seconds for the scan results to become available):
         
         aws accessanalyzer get-analyzed-resource \
              --analyzer-arn $ANALYZER_ARN \
              --resource-arn arn:aws:s3:::awscookbook109-$RANDOM_STRING

You should see output similar to the following (note the `isPublic` value):
         
         {
           "resource": {
           "actions": [
             "s3:GetObject",
             "s3:GetObjectVersion"
           ],
           "analyzedAt": "2021-06-26T17:42:00.861000+00:00",
           "createdAt": "2021-06-26T17:42:00.861000+00:00",
           "isPublic": true,
           "resourceArn": "arn:aws:s3:::awscookbook109-<<string>>",
           "resourceOwnerAccount": "111111111111",
           "resourceType": "AWS::S3::Bucket",
           "sharedVia": [
             "POLICY"
           ],
           "status": "ACTIVE",
           "updatedAt": "2021-06-26T17:42:00.861000+00:00"
           }
         }

  4. Set the public access block for your bucket:
         
         aws s3api put-public-access-block \
              --bucket awscookbook109-$RANDOM_STRING \
              --public-access-block-configuration \
         "BlockPublicAcls=true,IgnorePublicAcls=true,BlockPublicPolicy=true,RestrictPublicBuckets=true"

###### Note

See the AWS [article](https://oreil.ly/3jRmO) on the available `PublicAccessBlock` configuration properties.

#### Validation checks

Perform a scan of your S3 bucket:
    
    
    aws accessanalyzer start-resource-scan \
         --analyzer-arn $ANALYZER_ARN \
         --resource-arn arn:aws:s3:::awscookbook109-$RANDOM_STRING

Get the results of the Access Analyzer scan:
    
    
    aws accessanalyzer get-analyzed-resource \
         --analyzer-arn $ANALYZER_ARN \
         --resource-arn arn:aws:s3:::awscookbook109-$RANDOM_STRING

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {
      "resource": {
      "analyzedAt": "2021-06-26T17:46:24.906000+00:00",
      "isPublic": false,
      "resourceArn": "arn:aws:s3:::awscookbook109-<<string>>",
      "resourceOwnerAccount": "111111111111",
      "resourceType": "AWS::S3::Bucket"
      }
    }

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Security).

## Discussion

One of the best things you can do to ensure data security in your AWS account is to always make certain that you apply the right security controls to your data. If you mark an object as public in your S3 bucket, it is accessible to anyone on the internet, since S3 serves objects using HTTP. One of the most common security misconfigurations that users make in the cloud is marking object(s) as public when that is not intended or required. To protect against misconfiguration of S3 objects, enabling `BlockPublicAccess` for your buckets is a great thing to do from a security standpoint.

###### Tip

You can also set public block settings at your account level, which would include all S3 buckets in your account:
    
    
    aws s3control put-public-access-block \
        --public-access-block-configuration \
        BlockPublicAcls=true,IgnorePublicAcls=true,BlockPublicPolicy=true,RestrictPublicBuckets=true \
        --account-id $AWS_ACCOUNT_ID

You can serve S3 content to internet users via HTTP and HTTPS while keeping your bucket private. Content delivery networking (CDN), like Amazon CloudFront, provides more secure, efficient, and cost-effective ways to achieve global static website hosting and still use S3 as your object source. To see an example of a CloudFront configuration that serves static content from an S3 bucket, see [Recipe 1.10](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#serving_web_content_securely_from_sthre).

### Challenge

Deploy a VPC endpoint for S3 within your VPC and create a bucket policy to restrict access to your S3 bucket through this endpoint only.

# 1.10 Serving Web Content Securely from S3 with CloudFront

## Problem

You have nonpublic web content in S3 and want to configure CloudFront to serve the content. 

## Solution

Create a CloudFront distribution and set the origin to your S3 bucket. Then configure an origin access identity (OAI) to require the bucket to be accessible only from CloudFront (see [Figure 1-12](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#cloudfront_and_sthree)).

###### Figure 1-12. CloudFront and S3

### Prerequisite

  * S3 bucket with static web content

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Security).

### Steps

  1. Create a CloudFront OAI to reference in an S3 bucket policy:
         
         OAI=$(aws cloudfront create-cloud-front-origin-access-identity \
              --cloud-front-origin-access-identity-config \
              CallerReference="awscookbook",Comment="AWSCookbook OAI" \
              --query CloudFrontOriginAccessIdentity.Id --output text)

  2. Use the `sed` command to replace the values in the _distribution-config-template.json_ file with your CloudFront OAI and S3 bucket name:
         
         sed -e "s/CLOUDFRONT_OAI/${OAI}/g" \
              -e "s|S3_BUCKET_NAME|awscookbook110-$RANDOM_STRING|g" \
              distribution-template.json > distribution.json

  3. Create a CloudFront distribution that uses the distribution configuration JSON file you just created:
         
         DISTRIBUTION_ID=$(aws cloudfront create-distribution \
              --distribution-config file://distribution.json \
              --query Distribution.Id --output text)

  4. The distribution will take a few minutes to create; use this command to check the status. Wait until the status reaches “Deployed”:
         
         aws cloudfront get-distribution --id $DISTRIBUTION_ID \
             --output text --query Distribution.Status

  5. Configure the S3 bucket policy to allow only requests from CloudFront by using a bucket policy like this (we have provided _bucket-policy-template.json_ in the repository):
         
         {
           "Version": "2012-10-17",
           "Id": "PolicyForCloudFrontPrivateContent",
           "Statement": [
             {
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Principal": {
                 "AWS": "arn:aws:iam::cloudfront:user/CloudFront Origin Access Identity CLOUDFRONT_OAI"
               },
               "Action": "s3:GetObject",
               "Resource": "arn:aws:s3:::S3_BUCKET_NAME/*"
             }
           ]
         }

  6. Use the `sed` command to replace the values in the _bucket-policy-template.json_ file with the CloudFront OAI and S3 bucket name:
         
         sed -e "s/CLOUDFRONT_OAI/${OAI}/g" \
              -e "s|S3_BUCKET_NAME|awscookbook110-$RANDOM_STRING|g" \
              bucket-policy-template.json > bucket-policy.json

  7. Apply the bucket policy to the S3 bucket with your static web content:
         
         aws s3api put-bucket-policy --bucket awscookbook110-$RANDOM_STRING \
              --policy file://bucket-policy.json

  8. Get the `DOMAIN_NAME` of the distribution you created:
         
         DOMAIN_NAME=$(aws cloudfront get-distribution --id $DISTRIBUTION_ID \
              --query Distribution.DomainName --output text)

#### Validation checks

Try to access the S3 bucket directly using HTTPS to verify that the bucket does not serve content directly:
    
    
    curl https://awscookbook110-$RANDOM_STRING.s3.$AWS_REGION.amazonaws.com/index.html

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    $ curl https://awscookbook110-$RANDOM_STRING.s3.$AWS_REGION.amazonaws.com/index.html
    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
    <Error><Code>AccessDenied</Code><Message>Access
    Denied</Message><RequestId>0AKQD0EFJC9ZHPCC</RequestId><HostId>gfld4qKp9A93G8ee7VPBFrXBZV1HE3jiOb3bNB54fP
    EPTihit/OyFh7hF2Nu4+Muv6JEc0ebLL4=</HostId></Error>
    110-Optimizing-S3-with-CloudFront:$

Use `curl` to observe that your _index.html_ file is served from the private S3 bucket through CloudFront:
    
    
    curl $DOMAIN_NAME

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    $ curl $DOMAIN_NAME
    AWSCookbook
    $

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Security).

## Discussion

This configuration allows you to keep the S3 bucket private and allows only the CloudFront distribution to be able to access objects in the bucket. You created an [origin access identity](https://oreil.ly/aABzJ) and defined a bucket policy to allow only CloudFront access to your S3 content. This gives you a solid foundation to keep your S3 buckets secure with the additional protection of the CloudFront global CDN.

The protection that a CDN gives from a [distributed-denial-of-service (DDoS) attack](https://oreil.ly/mtHSB) is worth noting, as the end user requests to your content are directed to a point of presence on the CloudFront network with the lowest latency. This also protects you from the costs of having a DDoS attack against static content hosted in an S3 bucket, as it is generally less expensive to serve requests out of CloudFront rather than S3 directly.

By default, CloudFront comes with an HTTPS certificate on the default hostname for your distribution that you use to secure traffic. With CloudFront, you can associate your own custom domain name, attach a custom certificate from Amazon Certificate Manager (ACM), redirect to HTTPS from HTTP, force HTTPS, customize cache behavior, invoke Lambda functions (Lambda @Edge), and more.

### Challenge

Add a [geo restriction](https://oreil.ly/FMGj0) to your CloudFront distribution.