# Chapter 5. Serverless

# 5.0 Introduction

The technology industry term _serverless_ can sometimes lead to confusion in that servers are involved with the cloud services associated with this model of execution. The advantage is that end users do not need to worry about managing the underlying infrastructure and platform. The cloud provider (in this case, AWS) is responsible for all of the management, operating system updates, availability, capacity, and more.

In terms of [“serverless” services available on AWS](https://oreil.ly/5CIjp), many options are available to take advantage of the benefits. Here are some examples:

  * AWS Lambda and Amazon Fargate for compute

  * Amazon EventBridge, Amazon SNS, Amazon SQS, and Amazon API Gateway for application integration

  * Amazon S3, Amazon DynamoDB, and Amazon Aurora Serverless for datastores

The main benefits of serverless on AWS are as follows:

Cost savings
    

You pay for only what you use.

Scalability
    

Scale up to what you need; scale down to save costs.

Less management
    

There are no servers to deploy or systems to manage.

Flexibility
    

Many programming languages are supported in AWS Lambda.

The recipes in this chapter will enable you to explore several of the AWS services that fall under the “serverless” umbrella. You will find opportunities to extend the solutions with challenges and get experience with some new services that are leading the serverless industry trend.

## Workstation Configuration

Follow the [“General workstation setup steps for CLI recipes”](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/preface01.html#general_workstation_setup_steps_for_cli) to validate your configuration and set up the required environment variables. Then, clone the chapter code repository:
    
    
    git clone https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Serverless

## Chapter Prerequisites

### IAM role for Lambda function execution

Create a file named _assume-role-policy.json_ with the following content (file provided in root of the chapter repository):
    
    
    {
      "Version": "2012-10-17",
      "Statement": [
      {
        "Effect": "Allow",
        "Principal": {
        "Service": "lambda.amazonaws.com"
        },
        "Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
      }
      ]
    }

###### Note

A similar role is created automatically when you create a Lambda function in the AWS Management Console and select “Create a new role from AWS policy templates” for the execution role.

Create an IAM role with the statement in the provided _assume-role-policy.json_ file using this command:
    
    
    aws iam create-role --role-name AWSCookbookLambdaRole \
        --assume-role-policy-document file://assume-role-policy.json

Attach the `AWSLambdaBasicExecutionRole` IAM managed policy to the IAM role:
    
    
    aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name AWSCookbookLambdaRole \
        --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/service-role/AWSLambdaBasicExecutionRole

# 5.1 Configuring an ALB to Invoke a Lambda Function

## Problem

You have a requirement that your entire web application must be exposed to the internet with a load balancer. Your application architecture includes serverless functions. You need a function to be able to respond to HTTP requests for specific URL paths.

## Solution

Grant the Elastic Load Balancing service permission to invoke Lambda functions; then create a Lambda function. Create an ALB target group; then register the Lambda function with the target group. Associate the target group with the listener on your ALB. Finally, add a listener rule that directs traffic for the _/function_ path to the Lambda function (see [Figure 5-1](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch05.html#lambda_function_invoked_by_alb)).

###### Figure 5-1. Lambda function invoked by ALB

### Prerequisites

  * VPC with public subnets in two AZs and associated route tables

  * An Application Load Balancer that includes the following:

    * An associated security group that allows port 80 from the world

    * A listener on port 80

  * IAM role that allows the Lambda function to execute (provided in chapter prerequisites)

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Serverless).

### Steps

  1. Compress the function code provided in this recipe’s directory in the repository. This code will be used for the Lambda function. You can modify this code if you wish, but we have provided code for you to use. For example, zip the code with the following command:
         
         zip lambda_function.zip lambda_function.py

  2. Create a Lambda function that will respond to HTTP requests:
         
         LAMBDA_ARN=$(aws lambda create-function \
             --function-name AWSCookbook501Lambda \
             --runtime python3.8 \
             --package-type "Zip" \
             --zip-file fileb://lambda_function.zip \
             --handler lambda_function.lambda_handler --publish \
             --role \
             arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:role/AWSCookbookLambdaRole \
             --output text --query FunctionArn)

  3. Create an ALB target group with the target type set to `lambda`:
         
         TARGET_GROUP_ARN=$(aws elbv2 create-target-group \
             --name awscookbook501tg \
             --target-type lambda --output text \
             --query TargetGroups[0].TargetGroupArn)

  4. Use the `add-permission` command to give the Elastic Load Balancing service permission to invoke your Lambda function:
         
         aws lambda add-permission \
             --function-name $LAMBDA_ARN \
             --statement-id load-balancer \
             --principal elasticloadbalancing.amazonaws.com \
             --action lambda:InvokeFunction \
             --source-arn $TARGET_GROUP_ARN

  5. Use the `register-targets` command to register the Lambda function as a target:
         
         aws elbv2 register-targets \
             --target-group-arn $TARGET_GROUP_ARN \
             --targets Id=$LAMBDA_ARN

  6. Modify the listener for your ALB on port 80; then create a rule that forwards traffic destined for the _/function_ path to your target group:
         
         RULE_ARN=$(aws elbv2 create-rule \
             --listener-arn $LISTENER_ARN --priority 10 \
             --conditions Field=path-pattern,Values='/function' \
             --actions Type=forward,TargetGroupArn=$TARGET_GROUP_ARN \
             --output text --query Rules[0].RuleArn)

#### Validation checks

Test the invocation to verify that the Lambda function is invoked when requesting _/function_ :
    
    
    curl -v $LOAD_BALANCER_DNS/function

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Serverless).

## Discussion

Developers and software architects can leverage Lambda functions to provide a programmatic response to some kind of event within a larger system. This type of compute is most often used when the functions are responsible for a small unit of work. AWS added the ability for [Application Load Balancers to invoke Lambda functions](https://oreil.ly/R15DP) in 2018.

When an end user requests a specific URL path (configured by the developer) on an ALB, the ALB can pass the request to a Lambda function to handle the response. The ALB then receives the output from the function and hands the result back to the end user as an HTTP response. ALBs can have multiple paths and targets configured for a single load balancer, sending portions of traffic to specific targets (Lambda functions, containers, EC2 instances, etc.) ALBs also support [routing to Lambda functions using header values](https://oreil.ly/ljYBe). This simple architecture is extremely cost-effective and highly scalable.

This flexibility allows for a single ALB to handle all the traffic for your application and provides for a nice building block when architecting a system that needs to be exposed via HTTP/HTTPS.

### Challenge 1

Add a Fargate task that responds to another path on your ALB.

### Challenge 2

Try using an [Amazon API Gateway](https://aws.amazon.com/api-gateway) to play in front of your Lambda function.

# 5.2 Packaging Libraries with Lambda Layers

## Problem

You have Python code using external libraries that you need to include with your serverless function deployments.

## Solution

Create a folder and use `pip` to install a Python package to the folder. Then, `zip` the folder and use the _.zip_ file to create a Lambda layer that your function will leverage (see [Figure 5-2](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch05.html#lambda_function_layer_creation_and_repr)).

###### Figure 5-2. Lambda function layer creation and representation

### Prerequisite

  * IAM role that allows Lambda functions to execute (provided in chapter prerequisites)

### Steps

  1. In the root of this chapter’s repository, `cd` to the _502-Packaging-Libraries-with-Lambda-Layers_ directory and follow the subsequent steps:
         
         cd 502-Packaging-Libraries-with-Lambda-Layers/

  2. Zip up _lambda_function.py_ provided in the repository:
         
         zip lambda_function.zip lambda_function.py

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         updating: lambda_function.py (deflated 49%)

  3. Create a Lambda function that we will add a layer to:
         
         LAMBDA_ARN=$(aws lambda create-function \
             --function-name AWSCookbook502Lambda \
             --runtime python3.8 \
             --package-type "Zip" \
             --zip-file fileb://lambda_function.zip \
             --handler lambda_function.lambda_handler --publish \
             --role \
             arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:role/AWSCookbookLambdaRole \
             --output text --query FunctionArn)

  4. Create a directory for the layer contents:
         
         mkdir python

  5. Use `pip` to install the latest `requests` module to the directory:
         
         pip install requests --target="./python"

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         Collecting requests
           Using cached requests-2.26.0-py2.py3-none-any.whl (62 kB)
         Collecting certifi>=2017.4.17
           Using cached certifi-2021.5.30-py2.py3-none-any.whl (145 kB)
         Collecting idna<4,>=2.5
           Using cached idna-3.2-py3-none-any.whl (59 kB)
         Collecting urllib3<1.27,>=1.21.1
           Using cached urllib3-1.26.7-py2.py3-none-any.whl (138 kB)
         Collecting charset-normalizer~=2.0.0
           Using cached charset_normalizer-2.0.6-py3-none-any.whl (37 kB)
         Installing collected packages: urllib3, idna, charset-normalizer, certifi, requests
         Successfully installed certifi-2021.5.30 charset-normalizer-2.0.6 idna-3.2 requests-2.26.0 urllib3-1.26.7

  6. Zip the contents of the directory:
         
         zip -r requests-layer.zip ./python

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         adding: python/ (stored 0%)
           adding: python/bin/ (stored 0%)
           adding: python/bin/normalizer (deflated 28%)
           adding: python/requests-2.26.0.dist-info/ (stored 0%)
           adding: python/requests-2.26.0.dist-info/RECORD (deflated 55%)
           adding: python/requests-2.26.0.dist-info/LICENSE (deflated 65%)
           adding: python/requests-2.26.0.dist-info/WHEEL (deflated 14%)
           adding: python/requests-2.26.0.dist-info/top_level.txt (stored 0%)
           adding: python/requests-2.26.0.dist-info/REQUESTED (stored 0%)
           adding: python/requests-2.26.0.dist-info/INSTALLER (stored 0%)
           adding: python/requests-2.26.0.dist-info/METADATA (deflated 58%)

###### Note

Lambda layers require a specific folder structure. You create this folder structure when you use `pip` to install the `requests` module to the Python folder within your directory:
         
         $ tree -L 1 python/
         python/
         ├── bin
         ├── certifi
         ├── certifi-2020.12.5.dist-info
         ├── chardet
         ├── chardet-4.0.0.dist-info
         ├── idna
         ├── idna-2.10.dist-info
         ├── requests
         ├── requests-2.25.1.dist-info
         ├── urllib3
         └── urllib3-1.26.4.dist-info
         
         11 directories, 0 files

  7. Publish the layer and set an environment variable to use in the next steps:
         
         LAYER_VERSION_ARN=$(aws lambda publish-layer-version \
             --layer-name AWSCookbook502RequestsLayer \
             --description "Requests layer" \
             --license-info "MIT" \
             --zip-file fileb://requests-layer.zip \
             --compatible-runtimes python3.8 \
             --output text --query LayerVersionArn)

  8. Update the Lambda to use the layer that you created:
         
         aws lambda update-function-configuration \
             --function-name AWSCookbook502Lambda \
             --layers $LAYER_VERSION_ARN

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "FunctionName": "AWSCookbook502Lambda",
           "FunctionArn": "arn:aws:lambda:us-east-1:111111111111:function:AWSCookbook502Lambda",
           "Runtime": "python3.8",
           "Role": "arn:aws:iam::111111111111:role/AWSCookbookLambdaRole",
           "Handler": "lambda_function.lambda_handler",
           "CodeSize": 691,
           "Description": "",
           "Timeout": 3,
           "MemorySize": 128,
         ...

#### Validation checks

Test the Lambda:
    
    
    aws lambda invoke \
        --function-name AWSCookbook502Lambda \
        response.json && cat response.json

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Serverless).

## Discussion

Lambda layers can be used to extend the packages available within the default Lambda runtimes and also to provide your own custom runtimes for your functions. The default runtimes are associated with Amazon Linux. Custom runtimes can be developed on top of Amazon Linux to support your own programming language requirements. See this [tutorial](https://oreil.ly/XTWHX) to publish a custom runtime.

In this recipe, you packaged the Python `requests` module as a layer and deployed a Python function that uses that module. Layers can be used by multiple functions, shared with other AWS accounts, and they can also be version-controlled so that you can deploy and test new versions of your layers without impacting existing versions that are being used for your functions.

### Challenge

Create another Lambda function that uses the same layer. 

# 5.3 Invoking Lambda Functions on a Schedule

## Problem

You need to run a serverless function once per minute.

## Solution

Add a permission to your Lambda function to allow the EventBridge service to invoke the function. Then configure an EventBridge rule using a schedule expression for one minute that targets your function (see [Figure 5-3](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch05.html#eventbridge_triggering_a_time_based_inv)).

###### Figure 5-3. EventBridge triggering a time-based invocation of a Lambda function

### Prerequisites

  * Lambda function that you want to trigger

  * IAM role that allows Lambda functions to execute (provided in chapter prerequisites)

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Serverless).

### Steps

  1. Create an events rule with a scheduled expression with a rate of one minute:
         
         RULE_ARN=$(aws events put-rule --name "EveryMinuteEvent" \
             --schedule-expression "rate(1 minute)")

###### Note

You can use rate expressions and [Cron formats](https://crontab.guru/) for schedule expressions when defining a time-based event rule. The Cron expression syntax for the rule you created would look like the following:
         
         RULE_ARN=$(aws events put-rule --name "EveryMinuteEvent" \
         --schedule-expression "cron(* * * * ? *)")

For more information about schedule expressions, see this [support document](https://oreil.ly/K7e8Z).

  2. Add a permission to the Lambda function so that the EventBridge service can invoke it:
         
         aws lambda add-permission --function-name $LAMBDA_ARN \
             --action lambda:InvokeFunction --statement-id events \
             --principal events.amazonaws.com

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "Statement": "{\"Sid\":\"events\",\"Effect\":\"Allow\",\"Principal\":{\"Service\":\"events.amazonaws.com\"},\"Action\":\"lambda:InvokeFunction\",\"Resource\":\"arn:aws:lambda:us-east-1:111111111111:function:AWSCookbook503Lambda\"}"
         }

  3. Add your Lambda function as a target for the rule that you created:
         
         aws events put-targets --rule EveryMinuteEvent \
             --targets "Id"="1","Arn"="$LAMBDA_ARN"

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "FailedEntryCount": 0,
           "FailedEntries": []
         }

###### Note

There are many available target options. For the latest list, check the [documentation](https://oreil.ly/Rggow).

#### Validation checks

Tail the CloudWatch Logs log group to observe the function invoked every 60 seconds:
    
    
    aws logs tail "/aws/lambda/AWSCookbook503Lambda" --follow --since 10s

###### Note

You may have to wait a few moments for the log group to be created. If the log group doesn’t exist, you will get the following error:
    
    
    An error occurred (ResourceNotFoundException) when calling the FilterLogEvents operation: The specified log group does not exist.

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    $ $ aws logs tail "/aws/lambda/AWSCookbook503Lambda" --follow --since 10s
    2021-06-12T21:17:30.605000+00:00 2021/06/12/[$LATEST]4d1335bf8b0846938cb585871db38374 START RequestId:
    685481eb-9279-4007-854c-f99289bf9609 Version: $LATEST
    2021-06-12T21:17:30.607000+00:00 2021/06/12/[$LATEST]4d1335bf8b0846938cb585871db38374 AWS Cookbook Lambda
    function run at 2021-06-12 21:17:30.607500
    2021-06-12T21:17:30.608000+00:00 2021/06/12/[$LATEST]4d1335bf8b0846938cb585871db38374 END RequestId:
    685481eb-9279-4007-854c-f99289bf9609
    2021-06-12T21:17:30.608000+00:00 2021/06/12/[$LATEST]4d1335bf8b0846938cb585871db38374 REPORT RequestId:
    685481eb-9279-4007-854c-f99289bf9609    Duration: 0.94 ms    Billed Duration: 1 ms    Memory Size: 128 MB
    Max Memory Used: 51 MB
    ...

You can exit the tail session by pressing Ctrl-C.

###### Note

Notice that subsequent runs occur at one-minute increments from the time that you added the Lambda function as a target for your event rule.

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Serverless).

## Discussion

There are many reasons you would want to run functions on a schedule:

  * Checking stock prices

  * Checking the weather

  * Starting scheduled processes

  * Scheduling EC2 starting and stop

Being able to run serverless functions on a schedule without provisioning resources allows costs and management to be kept at a minimum. There are no servers to update, and you don’t need to pay for them when they are idle.

### Challenge

Pause and then enable the event rule. Here is a hint:
    
    
    aws events disable-rule --name "EveryMinuteEvent"
    aws events enable-rule --name "EveryMinuteEvent"

###### Note

EventBridge was formerly known as [Amazon CloudWatch Events](https://oreil.ly/K4ElM). EventBridge is now the preferred way to schedule events and uses the same API as CloudWatch Events.

When you need an AWS service to interact with another AWS service, you need to explicitly grant the permissions. In this case, EventBridge needs to be granted the permissions to invoke a Lambda function by using the `aws lambda add-permission` command.

# 5.4 Configuring a Lambda Function to Access an EFS File System

## Problem

You have an existing network share that is accessible by servers, but you want to be able to process files on it with serverless functions.

## Solution

You will create a Lambda function and mount your EFS file system to it (see [Figure 5-4](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch05.html#lambda_function_accessing_enis_within_t)).

###### Figure 5-4. Lambda function accessing ENIs within the subnet of a VPC

### Prerequisites

  * VPC with isolated subnets in two AZs and associated route tables

  * EFS file system with content that you want to access

  * IAM role that allows the Lambda function to execute (provided in chapter prerequisites)

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Serverless).

### Steps

  1. Create a new security group for the Lambda function to use:
         
         LAMBDA_SG_ID=$(aws ec2 create-security-group \
             --group-name AWSCookbook504LambdaSG \
             --description "Lambda Security Group" --vpc-id $VPC_ID \
             --output text --query GroupId)

  2. Add an ingress rule to the EFS file system’s security group that allows access on TCP port 2049 from the Lambda function’s security group:
         
         aws ec2 authorize-security-group-ingress \
             --protocol tcp --port 2049 \
             --source-group $LAMBDA_SG_ID \
             --group-id $EFS_SECURITY_GROUP

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "Return": true,
           "SecurityGroupRules": [
           {
             "SecurityGroupRuleId": "sgr-0f837d0b090ba38de",
             "GroupId": "sg-0867c2c4ca6f4ab83",
             "GroupOwnerId": "611652777867",
             "IsEgress": false,
             "IpProtocol": "tcp",
             "FromPort": 2049,
             "ToPort": 2049,
             "ReferencedGroupInfo": {
             "GroupId": "sg-0c71fc94eb6cd1ae3"
             }
             }
           ]
         }

  3. Create an IAM role using the statement in the provided _assume-role-policy.json_ file using this command:
         
         aws iam create-role --role-name AWSCookbook504Role \
             --assume-role-policy-document file://assume-role-policy.json

  4. You need to give your Lambda function the ability to execute within a VPC, so attach the IAM managed policy for `AWSLambdaVPCAccessExecutionRole` to the IAM role:
         
         aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name AWSCookbook504Role \
             --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/service-role/AWSLambdaVPCAccessExecutionRole

  5. Zip up the _lambda_function.py_ provided in the repository:
         
         zip lambda_function.zip lambda_function.py

  6. Create a Lambda function specifying the `ACCESS_POINT_ARN` of the EFS file system:
         
         LAMBDA_ARN=$(aws lambda create-function \
             --function-name AWSCookbook504Lambda \
             --runtime python3.8 \
             --package-type "Zip" \
             --zip-file fileb://lambda_function.zip \
             --handler lambda_function.lambda_handler --publish \
             --role \
             arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:role/AWSCookbook504Role \
             --file-system-configs Arn="$ACCESS_POINT_ARN",LocalMountPath="/mnt/efs" \
             --output text --query FunctionArn \
             --vpc-config SubnetIds=${ISOLATED_SUBNETS},SecurityGroupIds=${LAMBDA_SG_ID})

  7. Use this command to determine when the Lambda function has entered the active state (this may take a few moments):
         
         aws lambda get-function --function-name $LAMBDA_ARN \
             --output text --query Configuration.State

#### Validation checks

Execute the Lambda function to display the file’s contents:
    
    
    aws lambda invoke \
        --function-name $LAMBDA_ARN \
        response.json && cat response.json

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Serverless).

## Discussion

As a developer or software architect, you start to see the benefits of serverless technologies when you connect serverless compute to serverless persistent storage (filesystems and databases both). The compute and storage operational overhead is drastically reduced when using these types of services within applications. You can provision and scale your storage on demand while relying on AWS to manage the underlying infrastructure for you. While many applications will use an object-style storage service such as Amazon S3, others are best suited to a somewhat more traditional file-style storage service. Combining Lambda and EFS, as shown in this recipe, solves this problem with ease.

By integrating Amazon EFS with AWS Lambda, you can build solutions like the following:

  * Persistent storage for applications

  * Maintenance activities

  * Event-driven notifications

  * Event-driven file processing

The fully managed nature and the pay-per-use aspects of these services allow for the design, building, deployment, and operation of cost-effective and modern application architectures.

### Challenge 1

Create another Lambda function that has access to the same EFS file system.

### Challenge 2

Create a Lambda function that runs on a scheduled interval to detect if any files have been changed in the last 30 days.

## See Also

[Recipe 5.9](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch05.html#accessing_vpc_resources_with_lambda)

# 5.5 Running Trusted Code in Lambda Using AWS Signer

## Problem

You need to ensure that a serverless function deployed in your environment is running code from trusted sources. You need to verify the integrity of the code and have confidence that the code has not been modified after it has been signed.

## Solution

Create a signing profile and then start a signing job for your code by using AWS Signer. Finally, deploy a Lambda function that references your signing configuration and uses the signed code (see [Figure 5-5](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch05.html#signing_process_for_lambda_function_cod)).

###### Figure 5-5. Signing process for Lambda function code

### Prerequisites

  * S3 bucket with versioning enabled and source code copied to it

  * S3 bucket for AWS Signer to use a destination

  * IAM role that allows the Lambda function to execute (provided in chapter prerequisites)

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Serverless).

### Steps

  1. Get the version of the object in S3 that you will use. This is a zip of the code to be used in your Lambda function. You’ll need this when you start the signing job:
         
         OBJ_VER_ID=$(aws s3api list-object-versions \
             --bucket awscookbook505-src-$RANDOM_STRING \
             --prefix lambda_function.zip \
             --output text --query Versions[0].VersionId)

  2. Create a signing profile:
         
         SIGNING_PROFILE_ARN=$(aws signer put-signing-profile \
             --profile-name AWSCookbook505_$RANDOM_STRING \
             --platform AWSLambda-SHA384-ECDSA \
             --output text --query arn)

###### Note

You can find a list of the available signing platforms by running this command:
         
         aws signer list-signing-platforms

  3. Create a code-signing configuration for Lambda that refers to the signing profile:
         
         CODE_SIGNING_CONFIG_ARN=$(aws lambda create-code-signing-config \
             --allowed-publishers SigningProfileVersionArns=$SIGNING_PROFILE_ARN \
             --output text --query CodeSigningConfig.CodeSigningConfigArn)

  4. Start the signing job:
         
         SIGNING_JOB_ID=$(aws signer start-signing-job \
             --source 's3={bucketName=awscookbook505-src-'"${RANDOM_STRING}"',key=lambda_function.zip,version='"$OBJ_VER_ID"'}' \
             --destination 's3={bucketName=awscookbook505-dst-'"${RANDOM_STRING}"',prefix=signed-}' \
             --profile-name AWSCookbook505_$RANDOM_STRING \
             --output text --query jobId)

Wait a few moments and then verify that the signing job was successful:
         
         aws signer list-signing-jobs --status Succeeded

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "jobs": [
           {
             "jobId": "efd392ae-2503-4c78-963f-8f40a58d770f",
             "source": {
             "s3": {
               "bucketName": "awscookbook505-src-<<unique>>",
               "key": "lambda_function.zip",
               "version": "o.MffnpzjBmaBR1yzvoti0AnluovMtMf"
             }
             },
             "signedObject": {
             "s3": {
               "bucketName": "awscookbook505-dst-<<unique>>",
               "key": "signed-efd392ae-2503-4c78-963f-8f40a58d770f.zip"
             }
             },
             "signingMaterial": {},
             "createdAt": "2021-06-13T11:52:51-04:00",
             "status": "Succeeded",
         ...

  5. Retrieve the S3 object key of the resulting signed code:
         
         OBJECT_KEY=$(aws s3api list-objects-v2 \
             --bucket awscookbook505-dst-$RANDOM_STRING \
             --prefix 'signed-' \
             --output text --query Contents[0].Key)

  6. Create a Lambda function that uses the signed code:
         
         LAMBDA_ARN=$(aws lambda create-function \
             --function-name AWSCookbook505Lambda \
             --runtime python3.8 \
             --package-type "Zip" \
             --code S3Bucket=awscookbook505-dst-$RANDOM_STRING,S3Key=$OBJECT_KEY \
             --code-signing-config-arn $CODE_SIGNING_CONFIG_ARN \
             --handler lambda_function.lambda_handler --publish \
             --role \
             arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:role/AWSCookbookLambdaRole \
             --output text --query FunctionArn)

  7. Use this command to determine when the Lambda function has entered the active state:
         
         aws lambda get-function --function-name $LAMBDA_ARN \
             --output text --query Configuration.State

#### Validation checks

View your Lambda function in that console. Notice that you can’t edit the code. You will see the message, “Your function has signed code and can’t be edited inline.”

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Serverless).

## Discussion

Security-focused administrators and application developers can use this approach to implement a DevSecOps strategy by enforcing rules that allow only trusted code to be deployed in a given environment. By using [AWS Signer](https://oreil.ly/sPLFP), you can ensure that you are running only trusted code in your environments. This helps meet compliance requirements and increases the security posture of your application.

By using a digital signature generated by AWS Signer, your code is validated against a cryptographic fingerprint, and enforcement policies can be applied to restrict the deployment and execution of code. This capability paves the way to a strategic shift from “reactive” to “preventive” controls in your security and compliance governance.

### Challenge 1

Make a modification to the source code, sign it, and update the Lambda function.

### Challenge 2

You can change your `CodeSigningPolicies` from `Warn` to `Enforce`—this will block deployments if validation checks of the signature aren’t successful. Deploy a function that leverages this capability to ensure you are running only signed code in your environment:
    
    
    "CodeSigningPolicies": {
                 "UntrustedArtifactOnDeployment": "Warn"
        },

# 5.6 Packaging Lambda Code in a Container Image

## Problem

You want to use your existing container-based development processes and tooling to package your serverless code.

## Solution

Create a Docker image and push it to an Amazon Elastic Container Registry (ECR) repository. Create a Lambda function with the `package-type` of `Image` and code that references an image URL in ECR (see [Figure 5-6](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch05.html#deploying_lambda_code_packaged_in_a_doc)).

###### Figure 5-6. Deploying Lambda code packaged in a Docker image

### Prerequisites

  * ECR repository

  * IAM role that allows the Lambda function to execute (provided in chapter prerequisites)

  * Docker installed

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Serverless).

### Steps

  1. Get ECR login information and pass to Docker:
         
         aws ecr get-login-password | docker login --username AWS \
             --password-stdin $AWS_ACCOUNT_ID.dkr.ecr.$AWS_REGION.amazonaws.com

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         Login Succeeded

  2. Create a file called _app.py_ with the following code that you would like to execute in Lambda (file provided in the repository):
         
         import sys
         def handler(event, context):
             return 'Hello from the AWS Cookbook ' + sys.version + '!'

  3. Create a file called _Dockerfile_ with the following content that builds on an AWS-provided base image and references your Python code (file provided in the repository):
         
         FROM public.ecr.aws/lambda/python:3.8
         
         COPY app.py   ./
         CMD ["app.handler"]

  4. In the folder where the _Dockerfile_ and _app.py_ files exist, build the container image. The process will take a few minutes to complete:
         
         docker build -t aws-cookbook506-image .

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         [+] Building 19.1s (4/6)
          => [internal] load build definition from Dockerfile
             0.0s
          => => transferring dockerfile: 36B
             0.0s
          => [internal] load .dockerignore
             0.0s
          => => transferring context: 2B 
             0.0s
          => [internal] load metadata for public.ecr.aws/lambda/python:3.8
             2.2s
          => [internal] load build context 
             0.0s
         ...

  5. Add an additional tag to the image to allow it to be pushed to ECR:
         
         docker tag \
             aws-cookbook506-image:latest \
             $AWS_ACCOUNT_ID.dkr.ecr.$AWS_REGION.amazonaws.com/aws-cookbook-506repo:latest

  6. Push the image to the ECR repository. The process should take a few minutes to complete:
         
         docker push \
             $AWS_ACCOUNT_ID.dkr.ecr.$AWS_REGION.amazonaws.com/aws-cookbook-506repo:latest

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         The push refers to repository [111111111111.dkr.ecr.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/aws-cookbook-506repo]
         5efc5a3f50dd: Pushed
         a1f8e0568112: Pushing [=====>                               ]    10.3MB/98.4MB
         bcf453d1de13: Pushing [>                                    ]  3.244MB/201.2MB
         f6ae2f36d5d7: Pushing [==============================>      ]  4.998MB/8.204MB
         5959c8f9752b: Pushed
         3e5452c20c48: Pushed
         9c4b6b04eac3: Pushing [>

  7. Create a Lambda function with the Docker image by specifying a `--code` value that is the `ImageUri` of the Docker image :
         
         LAMBDA_ARN=$(aws lambda create-function \
             --function-name AWSCookbook506Lambda \
             --package-type "Image" \
             --code ImageUri=$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID.dkr.ecr.$AWS_REGION.amazonaws.com/aws-cookbook-506repo:latest \
             --role \
             arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:role/AWSCookbookLambdaRole \
             --output text --query FunctionArn)

###### Note

The `--runtime` and `--handler` parameters are not necessary or supported when creating a function that uses a container image.

Use this command to determine when the Lambda function has entered the active state:
         
         aws lambda get-function --function-name $LAMBDA_ARN \
             --output text --query Configuration.State

#### Validation checks

In the AWS Console, navigate to the Lambda→Functions menu. Notice that the “Package type” for your function is `Image`.

Invoke the function and view the response:
    
    
    aws lambda invoke \
        --function-name $LAMBDA_ARN response.json && cat response.json

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {
      "StatusCode": 200,
      "ExecutedVersion": "$LATEST"
    }
    "Hello from the AWS Cookbook 3.8.8 (default, Mar 8 2021, 20:13:42) \n[GCC 7.3.1 20180712 (Red Hat 7.3.1-12)]!"

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Serverless).

## Discussion

If your application code is packaged in container images, AWS Lambda provides this ability to package your function code inside container images. This allows for alignment with existing build, test, package, and deploy pipelines that you may already be using. You can package application code up to 10 GB in size for your functions. You can use the base images that AWS provides or create your own images, as long as you include a [runtime interface client](https://oreil.ly/N4wd7) that is required by the Lambda runtime environment.

You can store your container images on Amazon ECR, and your function must be in the same account as the ECR repository where you have stored your container image.

### Challenge

Update the application code, create a new image, push it to ECR, and update the Lambda function.

# 5.7 Automating CSV Import into DynamoDB from S3 with Lambda

## Problem

You need to load data from S3 into DynamoDB when files are uploaded to S3.

## Solution

Use a Lambda function to load the S3 data into DynamoDB and configure an S3 notification specifying the Lambda function to trigger on `S3:PutObject` events (see [Figure 5-7](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch05.html#using_a_lambda_function_to_load_data_in)).

###### Figure 5-7. Using a Lambda function to load data into a DynamoDB table

### Steps

  1. Navigate to this recipe’s directory in the chapter repository:
         
         cd 507-Importing-CSV-to-DynamoDB-from-S3

  2. Create a DynamoDB table:
         
         aws dynamodb create-table \
             --table-name 'AWSCookbook507' \
             --attribute-definitions 'AttributeName=UserID,AttributeType=S' \
             --key-schema 'AttributeName=UserID,KeyType=HASH' \
             --sse-specification 'Enabled=true,SSEType=KMS' \
             --provisioned-throughput \
             'ReadCapacityUnits=5,WriteCapacityUnits=5'

  3. Set a unique suffix to use for the S3 bucket name:
         
         RANDOM_STRING=$(aws secretsmanager get-random-password \
             --exclude-punctuation --exclude-uppercase \
             --password-length 6 --require-each-included-type \
             --output text \
             --query RandomPassword)

  4. Create an S3 bucket:
         
         aws s3api create-bucket --bucket awscookbook507-$RANDOM_STRING

  5. Create a role for a Lambda function allowing S3 and DynamoDB usage (file provided in the repository):
         
         aws iam create-role --role-name AWSCookbook507Lambda \
             --assume-role-policy-document file://assume-role-policy.json

  6. Attach the IAM managed policy for `AmazonS3ReadOnlyAccess` to the IAM role:
         
         aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name AWSCookbook507Lambda \
             --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonS3ReadOnlyAccess

  7. Attach the IAM managed policy for `AmazonDynamoDBFullAccess` to the IAM role:
         
         aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name AWSCookbook507Lambda \
             --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonDynamoDBFullAccess

###### Note

It is best to scope the Lambda function permission to the specific DynamoDB table resource rather than `AmazonDynamoDBFullAccess` (we used it for simplicity here). See [Recipe 1.2](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch01.html#generate_a_least_privilege_iam_policy_b) for details on how to create a more narrowly scoped permission.

  8. Attach the `AWSLambdaBasicExecutionRole` IAM managed policy to the IAM role:
         
         aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name AWSCookbook507Lambda \
             --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/service-role/AWSLambdaBasicExecutionRole

  9. Zip the function code:
         
         zip lambda_function.zip lambda_function.py

  10. Create a Lambda function by using the provided code and specifying the code:
         
         LAMBDA_ARN=$(aws lambda create-function \
             --function-name AWSCookbook507Lambda \
             --runtime python3.8 \
             --package-type "Zip" \
             --zip-file fileb://lambda_function.zip \
             --handler lambda_function.lambda_handler --publish \
             --environment Variables={bucket=awscookbook507-$RANDOM_STRING} \
             --role \
             arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:role/AWSCookbook507Lambda \
             --output text --query FunctionArn)

  11. Grant the S3 service invoke permissions for the Lambda function:
         
         aws lambda add-permission --function-name $LAMBDA_ARN \
             --action lambda:InvokeFunction --statement-id s3invoke \
             --principal s3.amazonaws.com

  12. Create a _notification-template.json_ file to use as the event definition for automatically triggering the Lambda function when your file (_sample_data.csv_) is uploaded. A file you can use is provided in the repository:
         
         {
           "LambdaFunctionConfigurations": [
             {
               "Id": "awscookbook507event",
               "LambdaFunctionArn": "LAMBDA_ARN",
               "Events": [
                 "s3:ObjectCreated:*"
               ],
               "Filter": {
                 "Key": {
                   "FilterRules": [
                     {
                       "Name": "prefix",
                       "Value": "sample_data.csv"
                     }
                   ]
                 }
               }
             }
           ]
         }

  13. You can use the `sed` command to replace the values in the provided _notification-template.json_ file with the environment variables you have created:
         
         sed -e "s/LAMBDA_ARN/${LAMBDA_ARN}/g" \
             notification-template.json > notification.json

  14. Configure the S3 bucket notification settings to trigger the Lambda function (one-liner config). NotificationConfiguration→LambdaConfigurations→Lambda ARN:
         
         aws s3api put-bucket-notification-configuration \
             --bucket awscookbook507-$RANDOM_STRING \
             --notification-configuration file://notification.json

  15. Upload a file to S3 to trigger the import:
         
         aws s3 cp ./sample_data.csv s3://awscookbook507-$RANDOM_STRING

#### Validation checks

View the results from your DynamoDB console, or use this CLI command to scan the table:
    
    
    aws dynamodb scan --table-name AWSCookbook507

###### Note

One of the great features of DynamoDB is that it provides AWS API endpoints for easy CRUD operations by your application via the AWS SDK.

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Serverless).

## Discussion

You can use AWS Lambda and Amazon DynamoDB together to build applications with massively scalable database persistence while minimizing the operational overhead required. Software architects and developers who are looking to build applications without worrying about server infrastructure may find it useful to use these two services together.

###### Warning

At the time of this writing, Lambda functions [time out after 900 seconds](https://oreil.ly/MnJNV). This could cause an issue with large CSV files or if the DynamoDB table does not have sufficient write capacity.

Event-driven applications are also an important concept in building modern cloud-native applications on AWS. When you created the _notification.json_ file, you specified your Lambda function and the S3 bucket, as well as a key pattern to watch for uploads to trigger the Lambda function when an object is put into the bucket. Using event-driven architecture helps minimize the cost and complexity associated with running your applications because the function logic is run only when needed.

### Challenge 1

Add some new data to the _sample_data.csv_ file, delete the file from your bucket, and re-upload the file to trigger the new import. Note that the existing data will remain, and the new data will be added.

### Challenge 2

Change the S3 notification and the Lambda function to allow for other filenames to be used with the solution.

### Challenge 3

Create a fine-grained IAM policy for your Lambda function that scopes down the function’s granted access to the DynamoDB table.

# 5.8 Reducing Lambda Startup Times with Provisioned Concurrency

## Problem

You need to ensure that a predetermined number (five) of invocations to your serverless function are as fast as possible. You need to eliminate any latency associated with cold starts.

## Solution

Create a Lambda function and set the function concurrency to 5 (see [Figure 5-8](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch05.html#provisioned_concurrency_for_a_lambda_fu)).

###### Figure 5-8. Provisioned concurrency for a Lambda function

### Prerequisite

  * IAM role that allows the Lambda function to execute (provided in chapter prerequisites)

### Steps

  1. Create a file called _lambda_function.py_ with the following content (file provided in the repository):
         
         from datetime import datetime
         import time
         
         def lambda_handler(event, context):
             time.sleep(5)
             print('AWS Cookbook Function run at {}'.format(str(datetime.now())))

  2. Zip the function code:
         
         zip lambda_function.zip lambda_function.py

  3. Create a Lambda function:
         
         aws lambda create-function \
             --function-name AWSCookbook508Lambda \
             --runtime python3.8 \
             --package-type "Zip" \
             --zip-file fileb://lambda_function.zip \
             --handler lambda_function.lambda_handler --publish \
             --timeout 20 \
             --role \
             arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:role/AWSCookbookLambdaRole

  4. Use this command to determine when the Lambda function has entered the active state:
         
         aws lambda get-function --function-name AWSCookbook509Lambda \
             --output text --query Configuration.State

###### Note

[Lambda function aliases](https://oreil.ly/8vXHA) allow you to reference a specific version of a function. Each Lambda function can have one or more aliases. The initial alias is named `LATEST`.

  5. Configure the provisioned concurrency for the Lambda function:
         
         aws lambda put-provisioned-concurrency-config \
             --function-name AWSCookbook508Lambda \
             --qualifier LATEST \
             --provisioned-concurrent-executions 5

#### Validation checks

Invoke the function six times in a row to see the limit hit:
    
    
    aws lambda invoke --function-name AWSCookbook508Lambda response.json &
    aws lambda invoke --function-name AWSCookbook508Lambda response.json

###### Note

The Lambda function you deployed needs to be run in parallel to demonstrate the capability of the provisioned concurrency feature. You may want to write a simple script which runs this command multiple times in parallel to prove that the provisioned concurrency enabled.

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Serverless).

## Discussion

Your code’s execution environment provisioning is handled for you by the Lambda service. This is a benefit of it being a fully managed service on AWS. Since the execution environment is provisioned on demand, a small amount of time is required to provision this environment for you. This is referred to as a _cold start_. Lambda keeps your execution environment provisioned (or “warm”) for a period of time so that if your function is invoked again, it will launch quickly. When you need your functions to respond quickly and achieve more concurrency, you can avoid the cold start and use provisioned concurrency to keep multiple copies of the execution environments “warm.”

Some developers and software architects need to build solutions with time-sensitive requirements measured in milliseconds in microservice-based applications. When you use Lambda-provisioned concurrency, you minimize the amount of time your function needs to start up when it is invoked.

### Challenge 1

Configure an API Gateway in front of your Lambda function and use a tool like [bees with machine guns](https://oreil.ly/EmxSn) or [ApacheBench](https://oreil.ly/3i7WV) to simulate user load.

### Challenge 2

Configure application autoscaling to modify the provisioned concurrency for your Lambda function based on time and/or a performance metric (e.g., response time).

# 5.9 Accessing VPC Resources with Lambda

## Problem

You need a serverless function to be able to access an ElastiCache cluster that has an endpoint in a VPC.

## Solution

Create a Lambda function that has a Redis client connection and package and specifies VPC subnets and security groups. Then create ElastiCache subnet groups and an ElastiCache cluster. Invoke the Lambda and pass the cluster endpoint to the function to test (see [Figure 5-9](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch05.html#lambda_accessing_an_elasticache_cluster)).

###### Figure 5-9. Lambda accessing an ElastiCache cluster in a VPC

### Prerequisite

  * IAM role that allows the Lambda function to execute (provided in chapter prerequisites)

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Serverless).

### Steps

  1. You need to give your Lambda function the ability to execute within a VPC, so attach the IAM managed policy for `AWSLambdaVPCAccess` to the IAM role (created in the chapter prerequisites):
         
         aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name AWSCookbookLambdaRole \
             --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/service-role/AWSLambdaVPCAccessExecutionRole
         	

  2. Install the Redis Python package to the current directory from the Python Package Index (PyPI):
         
         pip install redis -t .

  3. Zip the function code:
         
         zip -r lambda_function.zip lambda_function.py redis*

  4. Create a security group for the Lambda:
         
         LAMBDA_SG_ID=$(aws ec2 create-security-group \
             --group-name Cookbook509LambdaSG \
             --description "Lambda Security Group" --vpc-id $VPC_ID \
             --output text --query GroupId)

  5. Create a Lambda function that will respond to HTTP requests:
         
         LAMBDA_ARN=$(aws lambda create-function \
             --function-name AWSCookbook509Lambda \
             --runtime python3.8 \
             --package-type "Zip" \
             --zip-file fileb://lambda_function.zip \
             --handler lambda_function.lambda_handler --publish \
             --role arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:role/AWSCookbookLambdaRole \
             --output text --query FunctionArn \
             --vpc-config SubnetIds=${TRIMMED_ISOLATED_SUBNETS},SecurityGroupIds=${LAMBDA_SG_ID})

  6. Create an ElastiCache subnet group:
         
         aws elasticache create-cache-subnet-group \
             --cache-subnet-group-name "AWSCookbook509CacheSG" \
             --cache-subnet-group-description "AWSCookbook509CacheSG" \
             --subnet-ids $ISOLATED_SUBNETS

  7. Create an ElastiCache Redis cluster with one node:
         
         aws elasticache create-cache-cluster \
             --cache-cluster-id "AWSCookbook509CacheCluster" \
             --cache-subnet-group-name AWSCookbook509CacheSG \
             --engine redis \
             --cache-node-type cache.t3.micro \
             --num-cache-nodes 1

Wait for the cache cluster to be available.

  8. Invoke the function and view the response replacing _`HOSTNAME`_ with the host name of your cluster:
         
         aws lambda invoke \
             --cli-binary-format raw-in-base64-out \
             --function-name $LAMBDA_ARN \
             --payload '{ "hostname": "HOSTNAME" }' \
             response.json && cat response.json

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Serverless).

## Discussion

By default, Lambda functions do not have access to any VPC that you may have provisioned in your AWS environment. However, Lambda does support VPC connectivity by provisioning network interfaces in your VPC. ElastiCache requires compute nodes that have network interfaces in your VPC, so you need to configure Lambda within your VPC to allow it to access the ElastiCache nodes that you provision.

The compute memory that your function uses is not persistent if the function is invoked when the execution environment is spun down and restarted. If your application requires access to memory persistence (for example, in HTTP sessions), you can use the Amazon ElastiCache service to implement `redis` or `memcached` for session storage and key/value storage. These common solutions implement in-memory cache for fast read/write and allow you to scale horizontally with your application while maintaining memory persistence that your application requires.

### Challenge 1

Configure your Lambda function to read and write additional values to Amazon ElastiCache for Redis.