# Chapter 6. Containers

# 6.0 Introduction

A _container_ , put simply, packages application code, binaries, configuration files, and libraries together into a single package, called a _container image_. By packaging everything together in this way, you can develop, test, and run applications with control and consistency. You can quickly start packaging up and testing containers that you build locally, while ensuring that the exact same runtime environment is present regardless of where it is running. This generally reduces the time it takes to build something and offer it to a wide audience, and ensures consistency whenever you deploy.

Containers are wholly “contained” environments that leverage the underlying compute and memory capabilities on the host where they are running (your laptop, a server in a closet, or the cloud). Multiple containers can be run on the same host at once without conflicts. You can also have multiple containers running with the intention of them communicating with one another. Imagine that you have a frontend web application running as a container that accesses a container running a backend for your website, and you might want to run multiple instances of them at once to handle more traffic. Running multiple containers at once and ensuring they are always available can present some challenges, which is why you enlist the help of a container _orchestrator_. Popular orchestrators come in many flavors, but some of the common ones you may have heard of are Kubernetes and Docker Swarm.

You have options for running containers on AWS, such as Amazon Elastic Container Service (Amazon ECS) and Amazon Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS) as container orchestrators, and Amazon Elastic Cloud Compute (Amazon EC2) for deployments with custom requirements. Both of the AWS container orchestrator services mentioned (Amazon ECS and Amazon EKS) can run workloads on Amazon EC2 or on the fully managed AWS Fargate compute engine. In other words, you can choose to control the underlying EC2 instance (or instances) responsible for running your containers on Amazon ECS and Amazon EKS, allowing some level of customization to your host, or you can use Fargate, which is fully managed by AWS—you don’t have to worry about instance management. You can even use ECS and EKS within your own datacenter using ECS Anywhere and EKS Anywhere. AWS provides a comprehensive listing of all up-to-date container services on [its website](https://aws.amazon.com/containers).

Some AWS services (AWS CodeDeploy, AWS CodePipeline, and Amazon Elastic Container Registry) can help streamline the development lifecycle and provide automation to your workflow. These integrate well with Amazon ECS and Amazon EKS. Some examples of AWS services that provide network capabilities are Amazon Virtual Private Cloud, AWS Elastic Load Balancing, AWS Cloud Map, and Amazon Route 53.You can address your logging and monitoring concerns with Amazon CloudWatch and the [Amazon Managed Service for Prometheus](https://aws.amazon.com/prometheus). Fine-grained security capabilities can be provided by AWS Identity and Access Management (IAM) and AWS Key Management System (KMS). By following the recipes in this chapter, you will see how some of these services combine to meet your needs.

## Workstation Configuration

Follow the [“General workstation setup steps for CLI recipes”](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/preface01.html#general_workstation_setup_steps_for_cli) to validate your configuration and set up the required environment variables. Then, clone the chapter code repository:
    
    
    git clone https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers

## Chapter Prerequisites

### Docker installation and validation

[Docker Desktop](https://oreil.ly/Wfv89) is recommended for Windows and Mac users; [Docker Linux Engine](https://oreil.ly/taxpH) is recommended for Linux users. In the following recipes, you’ll use Docker to create a consistent working environment on your particular platform. Be sure to install the latest stable version of Docker for your OS.

#### MacOS

  1. Follow instructions from Docker Desktop: [_https://docs.docker.com/docker-for-mac/install_](https://docs.docker.com/docker-for-mac/install).

  2. Run the Docker Desktop application after installation.

#### Windows

  1. Follow instructions from Docker Desktop: [_https://docs.docker.com/desktop/windows/install_](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/windows/install).

  2. Run the Docker Desktop application after installation.

#### Linux

  1. Follow instructions from Docker Desktop: [_https://docs.docker.com/engine/install_](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install).

  2. Start the Docker daemon on your distribution:

Validation the installation of Docker on your workstation with the following command:
    
    
    docker --version

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    Docker version 19.03.13, build 4484c46d9d

Run the `docker images` command to list images on your local machine:
    
    
    REPOSITORY    TAG         IMAGE ID            CREATED             SIZE

# 6.1 Building, Tagging, and Pushing a Container Image to Amazon ECR

## Problem

You need a repository to store built and tagged container images.

## Solution

First, you will create a repository in Amazon ECR. Next, you will create a Dockerfile and use it to build a Docker image. Finally, you will apply two tags to the container image and push them both to the newly created ECR repository. This process is illustrated in [Figure 6-1](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch06.html#solution_workflow_of_buildcomma_tagcomm).

###### Figure 6-1. Solution workflow of build, tag, and push for container images

### Steps

  1. Log into the AWS Management Console and search for Elastic Container Registry. Click the “Create repository” button.

Give your repository a name, keep all defaults (as shown in [Figure 6-2](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch06.html#ecr_repository_creation)), scroll to the bottom, and click “Create repository” again to finish.

###### Figure 6-2. ECR repository creation

You now have a repository created on Amazon ECR that you can use to store container images. An example of the ECR console is shown in [Figure 6-3](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch06.html#screenshot_of_created_ecr_repository).

###### Figure 6-3. Screenshot of created ECR repository

Alternatively, you can also create an ECR repository from the command line:
         
         REPO=aws-cookbook-repo && \
         	aws ecr create-repository --repository-name $REPO

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "repository": {
           "repositoryArn": "arn:aws:ecr:us-east-1:111111111111:repository/aws-cookbook-repo",
           "registryId": "1111111111111",
           "repositoryName": "aws-cookbook-repo",
           "repositoryUri": "611652777867.dkr.ecr.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/aws-cookbook-repo",
           "createdAt": "2021-10-02T19:57:56-04:00",
           "imageTagMutability": "MUTABLE",
           "imageScanningConfiguration": {
             "scanOnPush": false
           },
           "encryptionConfiguration": {
             "encryptionType": "AES256"
           }
           }
         }

  2. Create a simple Dockerfile:
         
         echo FROM nginx:latest > Dockerfile

###### Note

This command creates a [Dockerfile](https://oreil.ly/VCCb7) that contains a single line instructing the Docker Engine to use the `nginx:latest` image as the base image. Since you use only the base image with no other lines in the Dockerfile, the resulting image is identical to the `nginx:latest` image. You could include some HTML files within this image by using the `COPY` and `ADD` Dockerfile directives.

  3. Build and tag the image. This step may take a few moments as it downloads and combines the image layers:
         
         docker build . -t \
             _$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID_.dkr.ecr._$AWS_REGION_.amazonaws.com/aws-cookbook-repo:latest

  4. Add an additional tag:
         
         docker tag \
             _$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID_.dkr.ecr._$AWS_REGION_.amazonaws.com/aws-cookbook-repo:latest \
             _$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID_.dkr.ecr._$AWS_REGION_.amazonaws.com/aws-cookbook-repo:1.0

  5. Get Docker login information:
         
         aws ecr get-login-password | docker login --username AWS \
             --password-stdin _$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID_.dkr.ecr.us-east-1.amazonaws.com

Here is the output:
         
         Login Succeeded

###### Note

An authorization token needs to be provided each time an operation is executed against a private repository. Tokens last for 12 hours, so the command you ran would need to be manually refreshed at that interval on your command line. To help you with automating the task of obtaining authorization tokens, you can use the ECR Docker Credential Helper, available from the [awslabs GitHub repository](https://oreil.ly/xI0xD).

  6. Push each image tag to Amazon ECR:
         
         docker push \
             _$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID_.dkr.ecr._$AWS_REGION_.amazonaws.com/aws-cookbook-repo:latest
         
         docker push \
             _$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID_.dkr.ecr._$AWS_REGION_.amazonaws.com/aws-cookbook-repo:1.0

###### Note

You will see “Layer already exists” for the image layer uploads on the second push. This is because the image already exists in the ECR repository due to the first push, but this step is still required to add the additional tag.

#### Validation checks

Now you can view both of the tagged images in Amazon ECR from the console, as shown in [Figure 6-4](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch06.html#screenshot_of_the_image_with_two_tags).

###### Figure 6-4. Screenshot of the image with two tags

Alternatively, you can use the AWS CLI to list the images:
    
    
    aws ecr list-images --repository-name aws-cookbook-repo

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {
      "imageIds": [
        {
          "imageDigest": "sha256:99d0a53e3718cef59443558607d1e100b325d6a2b678cd2a48b05e5e22ffeb49",
          "imageTag": "1.0"
        },
        {
          "imageDigest": "sha256:99d0a53e3718cef59443558607d1e100b325d6a2b678cd2a48b05e5e22ffeb49",
          "imageTag": "latest"
        }
      ]
    }

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers).

## Discussion

Having a repository for your container images is an important foundational component of the application development process. A private repository for your container images that you control is a best practice to increase the security of your application development process. You can grant access to other AWS accounts, IAM entities, and AWS services with permissions for Amazon ECR. Now that you know how to create an ECR repository, you will be able to store your container images and use them with AWS services.

###### Note

Amazon ECR supports the popular [Docker Image Manifest V2, Schema 2](https://oreil.ly/FeYVY) and most recently [Open Container Initiative (OCI)](https://oreil.ly/tzgdd) images. It can translate between these formats on pull. Legacy support is available for Manifest V2, Schema 1, and Amazon ECR can translate on the fly when interacting with legacy Docker client versions. The experience should be seamless for most Docker client versions in use today.

Container tagging allows you to version and keep track of your container images. You can apply multiple tags to an image, which can help you implement your versioning strategy and deployment process. For example, you may always refer to a “latest” tagged image in your dev environment, but your production environment can be locked to a specific version tag. The Docker CLI pushes tagged images to the repository and the tags can be used with pulls.

### Challenge

Modify the Dockerfile, build a new image, tag it with a new version number, and put it to ECR.

# 6.2 Scanning Images for Security Vulnerabilities on Push to Amazon ECR

## Problem

You want to automatically scan your container images for security vulnerabilities each time you push to a repository.

## Solution

Enable automatic image scanning on a repository in Amazon ECR, push an image, and observe the scan results, as shown in [Figure 6-5](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch06.html#container_image_scanning_solution_workf).

### Prerequisite

  * ECR repository

###### Figure 6-5. Container image scanning solution workflow

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers).

### Steps

  1. Rather than building a new container image from a Dockerfile (as you did in [Recipe 6.1](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch06.html#buildingcomma_taggingcomma_and_pushing)), this time you are going to pull an old NGINX container image:
         
         docker pull nginx:1.14.1

  2. On the command line, apply the scanning configuration to the repository you created:
         
         REPO=aws-cookbook-repo && \
             aws ecr put-image-scanning-configuration \
             --repository-name $REPO \
             --image-scanning-configuration scanOnPush=true

  3. Get Docker login information:
         
         aws ecr get-login-password | docker login --username AWS \
             --password-stdin $AWS_ACCOUNT_ID.dkr.ecr.$AWS_REGION.amazonaws.com

  4. Apply a tag to the image so that you can push it to the ECR repository:
         
         docker tag nginx:1.14.1 \
             $AWS_ACCOUNT_ID.dkr.ecr.$AWS_REGION.amazonaws.com/aws-cookbook-repo:old

  5. Push the image:
         
         docker push \
             $AWS_ACCOUNT_ID.dkr.ecr.$AWS_REGION.amazonaws.com/aws-cookbook-repo:old

#### Validation checks

Shortly after the push is complete, you can examine the results of the security scan of the image in JSON format:
    
    
    aws ecr describe-image-scan-findings \
        --repository-name aws-cookbook-repo --image-id imageTag=old

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {
      "imageScanFindings": {
        "findings": [
          {
            "name": "CVE-2019-3462",
            "description": "Incorrect sanitation of the 302 redirect field in HTTP transport method of apt versions 1.4.8 and earlier can lead to content injection by a MITM attacker, potentially leading to remote code execution on the target machine.",
            "uri": "https://security-tracker.debian.org/tracker/CVE-2019-3462",
            "severity": "CRITICAL",
            "attributes": [
              {
                "key": "package_version",
                "value": "1.4.8"
              },

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers).

###### Tip

Amazon ECR has a safety mechanism built in that does not let you delete a repository containing images. If the repository is not empty and the `delete-repository` command is failing, you can bypass this check by adding `--force` to the `delete-repository` command.

## Discussion

The [Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVEs)](https://cve.mitre.org/) database from the open source [Clair project](https://github.com/quay/clair) is used by Amazon ECR for [vulnerability scanning](https://oreil.ly/ZSiob). You are provided a Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) score to indicate the severity of any detected vulnerabilities. This helps you detect and remediate vulnerabilities in your container image. You can configure alerts for newly discovered vulnerabilities in images by using Amazon EventBridge and Amazon Simple Notification Service (Amazon SNS).

###### Warning

The scanning feature does not continuously scan your images, so it is important to push your image versions routinely (or trigger a manual scan).

You can retrieve the results of the last scan for an image at any time with the command used in the last step of this recipe. Furthermore, you can use these commands as part of an automated CI/CD process that may validate whether or not an image has a certain CVSS score before deploying.

### Challenge 1

Remediate the vulnerability by updating the image with the latest NGINX container image.

### Challenge 2

Configure an SNS topic to send you an email when vulnerabilities are detected in your repository.

# 6.3 Deploying a Container Using Amazon Lightsail

## Problem

You need to quickly deploy a container-based application and access it securely over the internet.

## Solution

Deploy a plain NGINX container that listens on port 80 to [Lightsail](https://oreil.ly/SaZCa). Lightsail provides a way to quickly deploy applications to AWS. The workflow is shown in [Figure 6-6](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch06.html#amazon_lightsail_serving_a_container_im).

###### Figure 6-6. Amazon Lightsail serving a container image

### Prerequisite

  * In addition to Docker Desktop and the AWS CLI (version 2), you need to install the [Lightsail Control plugin (lightsailctl)](https://oreil.ly/Tn2B9) for the AWS CLI.

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers).

### Steps

###### Note

Several power levels are available for Lightsail, each of which is priced according to the amount of compute power your container needs. We selected nano in this example. A list of power levels and associated costs is available in the Lightsail [pricing guide](https://oreil.ly/DSPNv).

  1. Once you have lightsailctl installed, create a new container service and give it a name, power parameter, and scale parameter:
         
         aws lightsail create-container-service \
             --service-name awscookbook --power nano --scale 1

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "containerService": {
             "containerServiceName": "awscookbook",
             "arn": "arn:aws:lightsail:us-east-1:111111111111:ContainerService/124633d7-b625-48b2-b066-5826012904d5",
             "createdAt": "2020-11-15T10:10:55-05:00",
             "location": {
               "availabilityZone": "all",
               "regionName": "us-east-1"
             },
             "resourceType": "ContainerService",
             "tags": [],
             "power": "nano",
             "powerId": "nano-1",
             "state": "PENDING",
             "scale": 1,
             "isDisabled": false,
             "principalArn": "",
             "privateDomainName": "awscookbook.service.local",
             "url": "https://awscookbook.<<unique-id>>.us-east-1.cs.amazonlightsail.com/"
           }
         }

  2. Pull a plain NGINX container image to use that listens on port 80/TCP.
         
         docker pull nginx

Use the following command to ensure that the state of your container service has entered the READY state (this may take a few minutes):
         
         aws lightsail get-container-services --service-name awscookbook

  3. When the container service is ready, push the container image to Lightsail:
         
         aws lightsail push-container-image --service-name awscookbook \
             --label awscookbook --image nginx

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         7b5417cae114: Pushed
         Image "nginx" registered.
         Refer to this image as ":awscookbook.awscookbook.1" in deployments.

###### Note

You can specify public image repositories or push your own image to your container service within Amazon Lightsail. Rather than using a private Amazon ECR location, your Lightsail images are kept within the Lightsail service. For more information, refer to the [Lightsail documentation for image locations](https://oreil.ly/Hi4Ny).

  4. Now you will associate the image you pushed with the container service you created for deployment. Create a file with the following contents and save it as _lightsail.json_ (file provided in the [code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers)):
         
         {
           "serviceName": "awscookbook",
           "containers": {
              "awscookbook": {
                 "image": ":awscookbook.awscookbook.1",
                 "ports": {
                    "80": "HTTP"
                 }
              }
           },
           "publicEndpoint": {
              "containerName": "awscookbook",
              "containerPort": 80
           }
         }

  5. Create the deployment:
         
         aws lightsail create-container-service-deployment \
             --service-name awscookbook --cli-input-json file://lightsail.json

View your container service again and wait for the ACTIVE state. This may take a few minutes:
         
         aws lightsail get-container-services --service-name awscookbook

Note the endpoint URL at the end of the output.

#### Validation checks

Now, visit the endpoint URL in your browser, or use the `curl` on the command line (e.g., `url: https://awscookbook.un94eb3cd7hgk.us-east-1.cs.amazonlightsail.com`):
    
    
    curl <<URL endpoint>>

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    ...
    <h1>Welcome to nginx!</h1>
    ...

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers).

## Discussion

Lightsail manages the TLS certificate, load balancer, compute, and storage. It can also manage MySQL and PostgreSQL databases as part of your deployment if your application requires it. Lightsail performs routine health checks on your application and will automatically replace a container you deploy that may have become unresponsive for some reason. Changing the power and scale parameters in the `lightsail create-container-service` command will allow you to create services for demanding workloads.

Using this recipe, you could deploy any common container-based application (e.g., Wordpress) and have it served on the internet in a short period of time. You could even point a [custom domain alias](https://oreil.ly/rB5Xf) at your Lightsail deployment for an SEO-friendly URL.

### Challenge

Scale your service so that it will be able to handle more traffic.

# 6.4 Deploying Containers Using AWS Copilot

## Problem

You need a way to use your existing Dockerfile to quickly deploy and manage a load balanced web service using best practices in a private network.

## Solution

Starting with a Dockerfile, you can use [AWS Copilot](https://oreil.ly/zH8YD) to quickly deploy an application using an architecture shown in [Figure 6-7](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch06.html#aws_copilot_load_balanced_web_service_i).

###### Figure 6-7. AWS Copilot load balanced web service infrastructure

### Prerequisite

  * [AWS Copilot CLI](https://oreil.ly/PvZlD)

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers).

### Steps

  1. Copilot requires an ECS service-linked role to allow Amazon ECS to perform actions on your behalf. This may already exist in your AWS account. To see if you have this role already, issue the following command:
         
         aws iam list-roles --path-prefix /aws-service-role/ecs.amazonaws.com/

(If the role is displayed, you can skip the following role-creation step.)

Create the ECS service-linked role if it does not exist:
         
         aws iam create-service-linked-role --aws-service-name ecs.amazonaws.com

###### Note

IAM service-linked roles allow AWS services to securely interact with other AWS services on your behalf. See the AWS [article](https://oreil.ly/CwzCZ) on using these roles.

  2. `cd` to this recipe’s directory in this chapter’s [code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers):
         
         cd 604-Deploy-Container-With-Copilot-CLI

###### Note

You could provide your own Dockerfile and content for this recipe. If you choose to use your own container with this recipe, ensure that the container listens on port 80/TCP. Or configure the alternate port with the `copilot init` command.

  3. Now use AWS Copilot to deploy the sample NGINX Dockerfile to Amazon ECS:
         
         copilot init --app web --name nginx --type 'Load Balanced Web Service' \
             --dockerfile './Dockerfile' --port 80 --deploy

###### Note

If you don’t specify any arguments to the `copilot init` command, it will walk you through a menu of options for your deployment.

The deployment will take a few moments. You can watch the progress of the deployment in your terminal.

#### Validation checks

After the deployment is complete, get information on the deployed service with this command:
    
    
    copilot svc show

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers).

## Discussion

###### Tip

Copilot exposes a command-line interface that simplifies deployments to Amazon ECS, AWS Fargate, and AWS App Runner. It helps streamline your development workflow and deployment lifecycle.

The `copilot init` command created a directory called _copilot_ in your current working directory. You can view and customize the configuration by using the _manifest.yml_ that is associated with your application.

###### Note

The test environment is the default environment created. You can add additional environments to suit your needs and keep your environments isolated from each other by using the `copilot env init` command.

Copilot configures all of the required resources for hosting containers on Amazon ECS according to many best practices. Some examples are deploying to multiple Availability Zones), using subnet tiers to segment traffic, and using AWS KMS to encrypt.

The AWS Copilot commands can also be embedded in your CI/CD pipeline to perform automated deployments. In fact, Copilot can orchestrate the creation and management of a CI/CD pipeline for you with the `copilot pipeline` command. For all of the current supported features and examples, visit the [AWS Copilot home page](https://aws.github.io/copilot-cli).

### Challenge

Reconfigure your Load Balanced Web Service to deploy to [AWS App Runner](https://oreil.ly/BvUTg) instead of Amazon ECS.

# 6.5 Updating Containers with Blue/Green Deployments

## Problem

You want to use a deployment strategy with your container-based application so you can update your application to the latest version without introducing downtime to customers, while also being able to easily roll back if the deployment was not successful.

## Solution

Use AWS CodeDeploy to orchestrate your application deployments to Amazon ECS with the Blue/Green strategy, as shown in [Figure 6-8](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch06.html#bluesolidusgreen_target_group_associati).

###### Figure 6-8. Blue/Green target group association

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers).

### Steps

  1. With the CDK stack deployed, open a web browser and visit the `LOAD_BALANCER_DNS` address on TCP port 8080 that the CDK output displayed. You will see the “Blue” application running:
         
         E.g.:
         firefox $LOAD_BALANCER_DNS:8080
         or
         open http://$LOAD_BALANCER_DNS:8080

  2. Create an IAM role with the statement in the provided _assume-role-policy.json_ file using this command:
         
         aws iam create-role --role-name ecsCodeDeployRole \
             --assume-role-policy-document file://assume-role-policy.json

  3. Attach the IAM managed policy for `CodeDeployRoleForECS` to the IAM role:
         
         aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name ecsCodeDeployRole \
             --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AWSCodeDeployRoleForECS

  4. Create a new ALB target group to use as the “Green” target group with CodeDeploy:
         
         aws elbv2 create-target-group --name "GreenTG" --port 80 \
             --protocol HTTP --vpc-id $VPC_ID --target-type ip

  5. Create the CodeDeploy application:
         
         aws deploy create-application --application-name awscookbook-605 \
             --compute-platform ECS

###### Note

CodeDeploy requires some configuration. We provided a template file for you (_codedeploy-template.json_) in this recipe’s directory of the [code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers).

  6. Use the `sed` command to replace the values with the environment variables you exported with the _helper.py_ script:
         
         sed -e "s/AWS_ACCOUNT_ID/${AWS_ACCOUNT_ID}/g" \
             -e "s|PROD_LISTENER_ARN|${PROD_LISTENER_ARN}|g" \
             -e "s|TEST_LISTENER_ARN|${TEST_LISTENER_ARN}|g" \
             codedeploy-template.json > codedeploy.json

###### Tip

`sed` (short for _stream editor_) is a great tool to use for text find-and-replace operations as well as other types of text manipulation in your terminal sessions and scripts. In this case, `sed` is used to replace values in a template file with values output from `cdk deploy` set as environment variables.

  7. Now, create a deployment group:
         
         aws deploy create-deployment-group --cli-input-json file://codedeploy.json

_AppSpec-template.yaml_ contains information about the application you are going to update. The CDK preprovisioned a task definition you can use.

  8. Use the `sed` command to replace the value with the environment variable you exported with the _helper.py_ script:
         
         sed -e "s|FargateTaskGreenArn|${FARGATE_TASK_GREEN_ARN}|g" \
             appspec-template.yaml > appspec.yaml

  9. Now copy the _AppSpec_ file to the S3 bucket created by the CDK deployment so that CodeDeploy can use it to update the application:
         
         aws s3 cp ./appspec.yaml s3://$BUCKET_NAME

  10. One final configuration file needs to be created; this contains the instructions about the deployment. Use `sed` to modify the S3 bucket used in the _deployment-template.json_ file:
         
         sed -e "s|S3BucketName|${BUCKET_NAME}|g" \
             deployment-template.json > deployment.json

  11. Now create a deployment with the deployment configuration:
         
         aws deploy create-deployment --cli-input-json file://deployment.json

To get the status of the deployment, observe the status in the AWS Console (Developer Tools→CodeDeploy→Deployments, and click the deployment ID). You should see CodeDeploy in progress with the deployment, as shown in [Figure 6-9](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch06.html#initial_deployment_status).

###### Figure 6-9. Initial deployment status

#### Validation checks

Once the replacement task is serving 100% of the traffic, you can visit the same URL where you previously observed the Blue application running, replaced with the Green version of the application.

###### Tip

You may need to refresh your browser or clear your cache to see the updated Green application.

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers).

## Discussion

CodeDeploy offers [several deployment strategies](https://oreil.ly/18B4u)—Canary, AllAtOnce, Blue/Green, etc.—and you can also create your own custom deployment strategies. You might customize the strategy to define a longer wait period for the cutover window or to define other conditions to be met before traffic switchover occurs. In the default Blue/Green strategy, CodeDeploy keeps your previous version of the application running for five minutes while all traffic is routed to the new version. If you notice that the new version is not behaving properly, you can quickly route traffic back to the original version since it is still running in a separate AWS Application Load Balancer target group.

CodeDeploy uses ALB target groups to manage which application is considered “production.” When you deployed the initial stack with the AWS CDK, the V1 Blue containers were registered with a target group associated with port 8080 on the ALB. After you initiate the deployment of the new version, CodeDeploy starts a brand new version of the ECS service, associates it with the Green target group you created, and then gracefully shifts all traffic to the Green target group. The final result is the Green V2 containers now being served on port 8080 of the ALB. The previous target group is now ready to execute the next Blue/Green deployment.

This is a common pattern to utilize with CI/CD. Your previous version can quickly be reactivated with a seamless rollback. If no rollback is needed, the initial version (V1) is terminated, and you can repeat the processes the next time you deploy, putting V3 in the Blue target group, shifting traffic to it when you are ready. Using this strategy helps you minimize the impact to users of new application versions while allowing more frequent deployments.

###### Tip

Deployment conditions allow you to define deployment success criteria. You can use a combination of a custom deployment strategy and a deployment condition to build automation tests into your CodeDeploy process. This would allow you to ensure that all of your tests run and pass before traffic is sent to your new deployment.

### Challenge

Trigger a rollback to the original V1 container deployment and observe the results.

# 6.6 Autoscaling Container Workloads on Amazon ECS

## Problem

You need to deploy a containerized service that scales out during times of heavy traffic to meet demand.

## Solution

Configure a CloudWatch alarm and scaling policy for an ECS service so that your service adds more containers when the CPU load increases, as shown in [Figure 6-10](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch06.html#ecs_service_with_a_cloudwatch_alarm_and).

###### Figure 6-10. ECS service with a CloudWatch alarm and scaling policy

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers).

### Steps

  1. Access the ECS service URL over the internet with the `curl` command (or your web browser) to verify the successful deployment:
         
         curl -v -m 3 $LOAD_BALANCER_DNS

  2. Use verbose (**`-v`**) and three-second timeout (**`-m 3`**) to ensure you see the entire connection and have a timeout set. The following is an example command and output:
         
         curl -v -m 3 http://AWSCookbook.us-east-1.elb.amazonaws.com:80/
         *   Trying 1.2.3.4...
         * TCP_NODELAY set
         * Connected to AWSCookbook.us-east-1.elb.amazonaws.com (1.2.3.4) port 80<
         > GET / HTTP/1.1
         > Host: AWSCookbook.us-east-1.elb.amazonaws.com:80
         > User-Agent: curl/7.64.1
         > Accept: */*
         >
         < HTTP/1.1 200
         < Content-Type: application/json
         < Content-Length: 318
         < Connection: keep-alive
         <
         {
         
         "URL":"http://awscookbookloadtestloadbalancer-36821611.us-east-1.elb.amazonaws.com:80/",
           "ContainerLocalAddress":"10.192.2.179:8080",
           "ProcessingTimeTotalMilliseconds":"0",
           "LoadBalancerPrivateIP":"10.192.2.241",
           "ContainerHostname":"ip-10-192-2-179.ec2.internal",
           "CurrentTime":"1605724705176"
         }
         Closing connection 0

###### Tip

Run this same `curl` command several times in a row, and you will notice the `ContainerHostname` and `ContainerLocalAddress` alternating between two addresses. This indicates that Amazon ECS is load balancing between the two containers you should expect to be running at all times, as defined by the ECS service.

  3. You will need to create a role for the autoscaling trigger to execute; this file is provided in this solution’s directory in the [code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers):
         
         aws iam create-role --role-name AWSCookbook606ECS \
             --assume-role-policy-document file://task-execution-assume-role.json

  4. Attach the managed policy for autoscaling:
         
         aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name AWSCookbook606ECS --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/service-role/AmazonEC2ContainerServiceAutoscaleRole

  5. Register an autoscaling target:
         
         aws application-autoscaling register-scalable-target \
             --service-namespace ecs \
             --scalable-dimension ecs:service:DesiredCount \
             --resource-id service/$ECS_CLUSTER_NAME/AWSCookbook606 \
             --min-capacity 2 \
             --max-capacity 4

  6. Set up an autoscaling policy for the autoscaling target using the sample configuration file specifying a 50% average CPU target:
         
         aws application-autoscaling put-scaling-policy --service-namespace ecs \
             --scalable-dimension ecs:service:DesiredCount \
             --resource-id service/$ECS_CLUSTER_NAME/AWSCookbook606 \
             --policy-name cpu50-awscookbook-606 --policy-type TargetTrackingScaling \
             --target-tracking-scaling-policy-configuration file://scaling-policy.json

  7. Now, to trigger a process within the container that simulates high CPU load, run the same `curl` command, appending **`cpu`** to the end of the service URL:
         
         curl -v -m 3 $LOAD_BALANCER_DNS/cpu

This command will time out after three seconds, indicating that the container is running a CPU-intensive process as a result of visiting that URL (the ECS service you deployed with the CDK runs a CPU load generator that we provided to simulate high CPU usage). The following is an example command and output:
         
         curl -v -m 3 http://AWSCookbookLoadtestLoadBalancer-36821611.us-east-1.elb.amazonaws.com:80/cpu
         *   Trying 52.4.148.24...
         * TCP_NODELAY set
         * Connected to AWSCookbookLoadtestLoadBalancer-36821611.us-east-1.elb.amazonaws.com (52.4.148.245) port 80 (#0)
         > GET /cpu HTTP/1.1
         > Host: AWSCookbookLoadtestLoadBalancer-36821611.us-east-1.elb.amazonaws.com:80
         > User-Agent: curl/7.64.1
         > Accept: */*
         >
         * Operation timed out after 3002 milliseconds with 0 bytes received
         * Closing connection 0
         curl: (28) Operation timed out after 3002 milliseconds with 0 bytes received

#### Validation checks

Wait approximately five minutes. Then log into the AWS Console, locate Elastic Container Service, go to the Clusters page, select the cluster deployed, and select the ECS service. Verify that the Desired Count has increased to 4, the maximum scaling value that you configured. You can click the Tasks tab to view four container tasks now running for your service.

Click the Metrics tab to view the CPU usage for the service. You set the scaling target at 50% to trigger the autoscaling actions, adding two additional containers to the service as a result of high CPU usage. An example metrics graph is shown in [Figure 6-11](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch06.html#ecs_service_metrics_on_the_aws_console).

###### Figure 6-11. ECS service metrics on the AWS Console

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers).

## Discussion

Autosccaling is an important mechanism to implement to save costs associated with running your applications on AWS services. It allows your applications to provision their own resources as needed during times when load may increase, and it removes their own resources during times when the application may be idle. Note that whenever you have an AWS service doing something like this on your behalf, you have to specifically grant permission for services to execute these functions via IAM.

The underlying data that provides the metrics for such operations is contained in the CloudWatch metrics service. There are many data points and metrics that you can use for configuring autoscaling; some of the most common ones are listed here:

  * Network I/O

  * CPU usage

  * Memory used

  * Number of transactions

In this recipe, you monitor the CPU usage metric on the ECS service. You set the metric at 50% and trigger the CPU load with a cURL call to the HTTP endpoint of the ECS service. Scaling metrics are dependent upon the type of applications you are running and the technologies you use to build them. As a best practice, you should observe your application metrics over a period of time to set a baseline before choosing metrics to implement autoscaling.

### Challenge

Replace the provided sample CPU load application with your own containerized application and configure the target scaling policy to meet your needs.

# 6.7 Launching a Fargate Container Task in Response to an Event

## Problem

You need to launch a container task to process incoming files.

## Solution

Use Amazon EventBridge to trigger the launch of ECS container tasks on Fargate after a file is uploaded to S3, as shown in [Figure 6-12](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch06.html#flow_of_container_eventbridge_pattern).

###### Figure 6-12. Flow of container EventBridge pattern

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers).

### Steps

  1. Configure CloudTrail to log events on the S3 bucket:
         
         aws cloudtrail put-event-selectors --trail-name $CLOUD_TRAIL_ARN --event-selectors "[{ \"ReadWriteType\":
         \"WriteOnly\", \"IncludeManagementEvents\":false, \"DataResources\": [{ \"Type\": \"AWS::S3::Object\",
         \"Values\": [\"arn:aws:s3:::$BUCKET_NAME/input/\"] }], \"ExcludeManagementEventSources\": [] }]"

Now create an assume-role policy JSON statement called _policy1.json_ to use in the next step (this file is provided in the repository):
         
         {
           "Version": "2012-10-17",
           "Statement": [
             {
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Principal": {
                 "Service": "events.amazonaws.com"
               },
               "Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
             }
           ]
         }

  2. Create the role and specify the _policy1.json_ file:
         
         aws iam create-role --role-name AWSCookbook607RuleRole \
             --assume-role-policy-document file://policy1.json

  3. You will also need a policy document with the following content called _policy2.json_ (this file is provided in the repository):
         
         {
           "Version": "2012-10-17",
           "Statement": [
             {
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Action": [
                 "ecs:RunTask"
               ],
               "Resource": [
                 "arn:aws:ecs:*:*:task-definition/*"
               ]
             },
             {
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Action": "iam:PassRole",
               "Resource": [
                 "*"
               ],
               "Condition": {
                 "StringLike": {
                   "iam:PassedToService": "ecs-tasks.amazonaws.com"
                 }
               }
             }
           ]
         }

  4. Now attach the IAM policy JSON you just created to the IAM role:
         
         aws iam put-role-policy --role-name AWSCookbook607RuleRole \
             --policy-name ECSRunTaskPermissionsForEvents \
             --policy-document file://policy2.json

  5. Create an EventBridge rule that monitors the S3 bucket for file uploads:
         
         aws events put-rule --name "AWSCookbookRule" --role-arn "arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:role/AWSCookbook607RuleRole" --event-pattern "{\"source\":[\"aws.s3\"],\"detail-type\":[\"AWS API Call via CloudTrail\"],\"detail\":{\"eventSource\":[\"s3.amazonaws.com\"],\"eventName\":[\"CopyObject\",\"PutObject\",\"CompleteMultipartUpload\"],\"requestParameters\":{\"bucketName\":[\"$BUCKET_NAME\"]}}}"

  6. Modify the value in _targets-template.json_ and create a _targets.json_ for use:
         
         sed -e "s|AWS_ACCOUNT_ID|${AWS_ACCOUNT_ID}|g" \
             -e "s|AWS_REGION|${AWS_REGION}|g" \
             -e "s|ECSClusterARN|${ECS_CLUSTER_ARN}|g" \
             -e "s|TaskDefinitionARN|${TASK_DEFINITION_ARN}|g" \
             -e "s|VPCPrivateSubnets|${VPC_PRIVATE_SUBNETS}|g" \
             -e "s|VPCDefaultSecurityGroup|${VPC_DEFAULT_SECURITY_GROUP}|g" \
             targets-template.json > targets.json

  7. Create a rule target that specifies the ECS cluster, ECS task definition, IAM role, and networking parameters. This specifies what the rule will trigger; in this case, launch a container on Fargate:
         
         aws events put-targets --rule AWSCookbookRule \
             --targets file://targets.json

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "FailedEntryCount": 0,
           "FailedEntries": []
         }

  8. Check the S3 bucket to verify that it’s empty before we populate it:
         
         aws s3 ls s3://$BUCKET_NAME/

  9. Copy the provided _maze.jpg_ file to the S3 bucket. This will trigger the ECS task that launches a container with a [Python library](https://pypi.org/project/mazesolver) to process the file:
         
         aws s3 cp maze.jpg s3://$BUCKET_NAME/input/maze.jpg

This will trigger an ECS task to process the image file. Quickly, check the task with the `ecs list-tasks` command. The task will run for about two to three minutes:
         
         aws ecs list-tasks --cluster $ECS_CLUSTER_ARN

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "taskArns": [
             "arn:aws:ecs:us-east-1:111111111111:task/cdk-aws-cookbook-607-AWSCookbookEcsCluster46494E6E-MX7kvtp1sYWZ/d86f16af55da56b5ca4874d6029"
           ]
         }

#### Validation checks

After a few minutes, observe the output directory created in the S3 bucket:
    
    
    aws s3 ls s3://$BUCKET_NAME/output/

Download and view the output file:
    
    
    aws s3 cp s3://$BUCKET_NAME/output/output.jpg ./output.jpg

Open _output.jpg_ with a file viewer of your choice to view the file that was processed.

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers).

## Discussion

Event-driven architecture is an important approach to application and process design in the cloud. This type of design allows for removing long-running application workloads in favor of serverless architectures, which can be more resilient and easily scale to peaks of higher usage when needed. When there are no events to handle in your application, you generally do not pay much for compute resources (if at all), so potential cost savings is also a point to consider when choosing an application architecture.

###### Note

It is common to use Lambda functions with S3 for event-driven architectures, but for longer-running data-processing jobs and computational jobs like this one, Fargate is a better choice because the runtime is essentially infinite, while the maximum runtime for Lambda functions is limited.

Amazon ECS can run tasks and services. Services are made up of tasks, and generally, are long-running in that a service keeps a specific set of tasks running. Tasks can be short-lived; a container may start, process some data, and then gracefully exit after the task is complete. This is what you have achieved in this solution: a task was launched in response to an S3 event signaling a new object, and the container read the object, processed the file, and exited.

### Challenge

While EventBridge is a powerful solution that can be used to orchestrate many types of event-driven solutions, you can achieve similar functionality with S3’s triggers. Try to deploy and configure a Lambda function to be invoked directly from S3 events. [Here is a hint.](https://oreil.ly/rfTno)

# 6.8 Capturing Logs from Containers Running on Amazon ECS

## Problem

You have an application running in a container and want to inspect the application logs.

## Solution

Send the logs from the container to Amazon CloudWatch. By specifying the `awslogs` driver within an ECS task definition and providing an IAM role that allows the container to write to CloudWatch logs, you are able to stream container logs to a location within Amazon CloudWatch. A high-level view of this configuration and process is shown in [Figure 6-13](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch06.html#streaming_container_logs_to_cloudwatch).

###### Figure 6-13. Streaming container logs to CloudWatch

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers).

### Steps

  1. Create a file called _task-execution-assume-role.json_ with the following content. The file is provided in the root of this recipe’s directory in the code repository.
         
         {
           "Version": "2012-10-17",
           "Statement": [
             {
               "Sid": "",
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Principal": {
                 "Service": "ecs-tasks.amazonaws.com"
               },
               "Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
             }
           ]
         }

  2. Create an IAM role using the statement in the preceding file:
         
         aws iam create-role --role-name AWSCookbook608ECS \
             --assume-role-policy-document file://task-execution-assume-role.json

  3. Attach the AWS managed IAM policy for ECS task execution to the IAM role that you just created:
         
         aws iam attach-role-policy --role-name AWSCookbook608ECS --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/service-
         role/AmazonECSTaskExecutionRolePolicy

  4. Create a log group in CloudWatch:
         
         aws logs create-log-group --log-group-name AWSCookbook608ECS

  5. Create a file called _taskdef.json_ with the following content (a file is provided in this recipe’s directory in the code repository):
         
         {
           "networkMode": "awsvpc",
           "containerDefinitions": [
             {
               "portMappings": [
                 {
                   "hostPort": 80,
                   "containerPort": 80,
                   "protocol": "tcp"
                 }
               ],
               "essential": true,
               "entryPoint": [
                 "sh",
                 "-c"
               ],
               "logConfiguration": {
                 "logDriver": "awslogs",
                 "options": {
                   "awslogs-group": "AWSCookbook608ECS",
                   "awslogs-region": "us-east-1",
                   "awslogs-stream-prefix": "LogStream"
                 }
               },
               "name": "awscookbook608",
               "image": "httpd:2.4",
               "command": [
                 "/bin/sh -c \"echo 'Hello AWS Cookbook Reader, this container is running on ECS!' >
         /usr/local/apache2/htdocs/index.html && httpd-foreground\""
               ]
             }
           ],
           "family": "awscookbook608",
           "requiresCompatibilities": [
             "FARGATE"
           ],
           "cpu": "256",
           "memory": "512"
         }

  6. Now that you have an IAM role and an ECS task definition configuration, you need to create the ECS task using the configuration and associate the IAM role:
         
         aws ecs register-task-definition --execution-role-arn \
             "arn:aws:iam::_$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID_ :role/AWSCookbook608ECS" \
             --cli-input-json file://taskdef.json

  7. Run the ECS task on the ECS cluster that you created earlier in this recipe with the AWS CDK:
         
         aws ecs run-task --cluster $ECS_CLUSTER_NAME \
             --launch-type FARGATE --network-configuration
         "awsvpcConfiguration={subnets=[$VPC_PUBLIC_SUBNETS],securityGroups=[$VPC_DEFAULT_SECURITY_GROUP],assign
         PublicIp=ENABLED}" --task-definition awscookbook608

#### Validation checks

Check the status of the task to make sure the task is running. First, find the Task’s Amazon Resource Name (ARN):
    
    
    TASK_ARNS=$(aws ecs list-tasks --cluster $ECS_CLUSTER_NAME \
        --output text --query taskArns)

Then use the task ARNs to check for the RUNNING state with the `describe-tasks` command output:
    
    
    aws ecs describe-tasks --cluster $ECS_CLUSTER_NAME --tasks $TASK_ARNS

After the task has reached the RUNNING state (approximately 15 seconds), use the following commands to view logs:
    
    
    aws logs describe-log-streams --log-group-name AWSCookbook608ECS

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {
      "logStreams": [
        {
          "logStreamName": "LogStream/webserver/97635dab942e48d1bab11dbe88c8e5c3",
          "creationTime": 1605584764184,
          "firstEventTimestamp": 1605584765067,
          "lastEventTimestamp": 1605584765067,
          "lastIngestionTime": 1605584894363,
          "uploadSequenceToken": "49612420096740389364147985468451499506623702081936625922",
          "arn": "arn:aws:logs:us-east-1:111111111111:log-group:AWSCookbook608ECS:log-stream:LogStream/webserver/97635dab942e48d1bab11dbe88c8e5c3",
          "storedBytes": 0
        }
      ]
    }

Note the `logStreamName` from the output and then run the `get-log-events` command:
    
    
    aws logs get-log-events --log-group-name AWSCookbook608ECS \
        --log-stream-name <<logStreamName>>

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {
      "events": [
        {
          "timestamp": 1605590555566,
          "message": "[Tue Nov 17 05:22:35.566054 2020] [mpm_event:notice] [pid 7:tid 140297116308608] AH00489: Apache/2.4.46 (Unix) configured -- resuming normal operations",
          "ingestionTime": 1605590559713
        },
        {
          "timestamp": 1605590555566,
          "message": "[Tue Nov 17 05:22:35.566213 2020] [core:notice] [pid 7:tid 140297116308608] AH00094: Command line: 'httpd -D FOREGROUND'",
          "ingestionTime": 1605590559713
        }
     ],
     "nextForwardToken": "f/35805865872844590178623550035180924397996026459535048705",
     "nextBackwardToken": "b/35805865872844590178623550035180924397996026459535048704"
    }

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Containers).

## Discussion

You made use of the `awslogs` driver and an IAM role, which allows the running task to write to a CloudWatch log group. This is a common pattern when working with containers on AWS, as you most likely need log output for troubleshooting and debugging your application. This configuration is handled by tools like Copilot since it is a common pattern, but when working with Amazon ECS directly, like defining and running a task, the configuration is critical for developers to know about.

The PID 1 [process output](https://oreil.ly/XY2UF) to _/dev/stdout_ and _/dev/stderr_ is captured by the awslogs driver. In other words, the first process in the container is the only process logging to these streams. Be sure your application that you would like to see logs from is running with PID 1 inside of your container.

In order for most AWS services to communicate with one another, you must assign a role to them that allows the required level of permissions for the communication. This holds true when configuring logging to CloudWatch from a container ECS task; the container must have a role associated with it that allows the CloudWatchLogs operations via the [`awslogs logConfiguration` driver](https://oreil.ly/OrzrZ):
    
    
    {
      "Version": "2012-10-17",
      "Statement": [
        {
          "Effect": "Allow",
          "Action": [
            "logs:CreateLogGroup",
            "logs:CreateLogStream",
            "logs:PutLogEvents",
            "logs:DescribeLogStreams"
          ],
          "Resource": [
            "arn:aws:logs:*:*:*"
          ]
        }
      ]
    }

CloudWatch logs allow for a central logging solution for many AWS services. When running multiple containers, it is important to be able to quickly locate logs for debugging purposes.

### Challenge

You can [tail](https://oreil.ly/kFrGf) the logs of a log stream to give you a more real-time view of the logs that your application is generating. This can help in your development and troubleshooting activities. Try using the `aws logs tail` command with your log stream while generating some output for you to observe.