# Chapter 7. Big Data

# 7.0 Introduction

Data is sometimes referred to as “[the new gold](https://oreil.ly/6EDB0).” Many companies are leveraging data in new and exciting ways every day as available data science tools continue to improve. You can now mine troves of historical data quickly for insights and patterns by using modern analytics tools. You might not yet know the queries and analysis you need to run against the data, but tomorrow you might be faced with a challenge that could be supported by historical data analysis using new and emerging techniques. With the advent of cheaper data storage, many organizations and individuals opt to keep data rather than discard it so that they can run historical analysis to gain business insights, discover trends, train AI/ML models, and be ready to implement future technologies that can use the data.

In addition to the amount of data you might collect over time, you are also collecting a wider variety of data types and structures at an increasingly faster velocity. Imagine that you might deploy IoT devices to collect sensor data, and as you continue to deploy these over time, you need a way to capture and store the data in a scalable way. This can be structured, semistructured, and unstructured data with schemas that might be difficult to predict as new data sources are ingested. You need tools to be able to transform and analyze your diverse data.

An informative and succinct AWS re:Invent 2020 presentation by Francis Jayakumar, “[An Introduction to Data Lakes and Analytics on AWS](https://oreil.ly/WcmSj),” provides a high-level introduction to what is available on AWS for big data and analytics. We could have included so much in this chapter—enough to fill another book—but we will focus on foundational recipes for sending data to S3, discovering data on S3, and transforming data to give you examples of working with data on AWS.

## Workstation Configuration

You will need a few things installed to be ready for the recipes in this chapter.

### General setup

Follow the [“General workstation setup steps for CLI recipes”](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/preface01.html#general_workstation_setup_steps_for_cli) to validate your configuration and set up the required environment variables. Then, clone the chapter code repository:
    
    
    git clone https://github.com/awscookbook/BigData

# 7.1 Using a Kinesis Stream for Ingestion of Streaming Data

## Problem

You need a way to ingest streaming data for your applications.

## Solution

Create a Kinesis stream and verify that it is working by using the AWS CLI to put a record on the stream, as shown in [Figure 7-1](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#using_a_kinesis_stream_for-id0000050).

###### Figure 7-1. Using a Kinesis stream for ingestion of streaming data

### Steps

  1. Create a Kinesis stream:
         
         aws kinesis create-stream --stream-name AWSCookbook701 --shard-count 1

###### Note

[Shards](https://oreil.ly/XKI0q) are an important concept to understand with Kinesis streams as you scale your stream to handle larger velocities of incoming streaming data. Each shard can support up to five transactions per second for reads, up to a maximum total data read rate of 2 MB per second. For writes, each shard can support up to 1,000 records per second, up to a maximum total data write rate of 1 MB per second (including partition keys). You can re-shard your stream at any time if you need to handle more data.

  2. Confirm that your stream is in ACTIVE state:
         
         aws kinesis describe-stream-summary --stream-name AWSCookbook701

You should see output similar to the following:
         
         {
           "StreamDescriptionSummary": {
             "StreamName": "AWSCookbook701",
             "StreamARN": "arn:aws:kinesis:us-east-1:111111111:stream/AWSCookbook701",
             "StreamStatus": "ACTIVE",
             "RetentionPeriodHours": 24,
             "StreamCreationTimestamp": "2021-10-12T17:12:06-04:00",
             "EnhancedMonitoring": [
               {
                 "ShardLevelMetrics": []
               }
             ],
             "EncryptionType": "NONE",
             "OpenShardCount": 1,
             "ConsumerCount": 0
           }
         }

#### Validation checks

Put a record on the Kinesis stream:
    
    
    aws kinesis put-record --stream-name AWSCookbook701 \
         --partition-key 111 \
         --cli-binary-format raw-in-base64-out \
         --data={\"Data\":\"1\"}

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {
      "ShardId": "shardId-000000000000",
      "SequenceNumber": "49622914081337086513355510347442886426455090590105206786"
    }

Get the record from the Kinesis stream. [Get the shard iterator](https://oreil.ly/dFx8m) and run the `get-records` command:
    
    
    SHARD_ITERATOR=$(aws kinesis get-shard-iterator \
         --shard-id shardId-000000000000 \
         --shard-iterator-type TRIM_HORIZON \
         --stream-name AWSCookbook701 \
         --query 'ShardIterator' \
         --output text)
    aws kinesis get-records --shard-iterator $SHARD_ITERATOR \
         --query Records[0].Data --output text | base64 --decode

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {"Data":"1"}

###### Note

The data is base64 encoded that you published to the stream. You queried the command output for the data element within the JSON object and piped the output to `base64 --decode` to validate that the record is what you published.

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/BigData).

## Discussion

Streaming data can come from a variety of sources. The sources putting records on streams are known as [producers](https://oreil.ly/ze6Wd). Entities getting records from streams are known as [consumers](https://oreil.ly/dzRG2). In the case of streaming data, you are dealing with real-time information, and you may need to act on it immediately or store it for usage later (see [Recipe 7.2](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#streaming_data_to_amazon-id0000022)). Some common producer examples to think about are as follows:

  * Real-time financial market data

  * IoT and sensor data

  * End-user clickstream activity from web and mobile applications

You can use the Kinesis Producer Library (KPL) and Kinesis Client Library (KCL) within your application for your specific needs. When consuming data from Kinesis streams, you can configure your application to read records from the stream and respond, invoke Lambda functions directly from the stream, or even use a [Kinesis Data Analytics](https://oreil.ly/lyR4E) application (powered by Apache Flink) directly within the Kinesis service.

###### Note

The Kinesis service will scale automatically to meet your needs, but you need to be aware of the [quotas and limits](https://oreil.ly/f7kq3) to ensure that you do not exceed capacity with your shard configuration.

### Challenge

Automatically trigger a Lambda function to process incoming Kinesis data.

# 7.2 Streaming Data to Amazon S3 Using Amazon Kinesis Data Firehose

## Problem

You need to deliver incoming streaming data to object storage.

## Solution

Create an S3 bucket, create a Kinesis stream, and configure Kinesis Data Firehose to deliver the stream data to the S3 bucket. The flow is shown in [Figure 7-2](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#streaming_data_to_amazon-id0000048).

###### Figure 7-2. Streaming data to Amazon S3 using Amazon Kinesis Data Firehose

### Prerequisites

  * Kinesis stream

  * S3 Bucket with a CSV file

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/BigData).

### Steps

  1. Open the [Kinesis Data Firehose console](https://oreil.ly/GG8yA) and click the “Create delivery stream” button; choose Amazon Kinesis Data Streams for the source and Amazon S3 for the destination, as shown in [Figure 7-3](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#kinesis_data_firehose_choose_source_and).

###### Figure 7-3. Choosing the source and destination in the Kinesis Data Firehose dialog

  2. For Source settings, choose the Kinesis stream that you created in the preparation steps, as shown in [Figure 7-4](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#choosing_a_kinesis_data_stream).

###### Figure 7-4. Choosing a Kinesis data stream

  3. Keep the defaults (Disabled) for “Transform and convert records” options. For Destination settings, browse for and choose the S3 bucket that you created in the preparation steps as shown in [Figure 7-5](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#kinesis_data_firehose_destination_confi), and keep the defaults for the other options (disabled partitioning and no prefixes).

###### Figure 7-5. Kinesis Data Firehose destination configuration

  4. Under the Advanced settings section, confirm that the “Create or update IAM role” is selected. This will create an IAM role that Kinesis can use to access the stream and S3 bucket, as shown in [Figure 7-6](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#creating_an_iam_role_for_the_kinesis_da).

###### Figure 7-6. Creating an IAM role for the Kinesis Data Firehose service

#### Validation checks

You can test delivery to the stream from within the Kinesis console. Click the Delivery streams link in the left navigation menu, choose the stream you created, expand the “Test with demo data” section, and click the “Start sending demo data” button. This will initiate sending sample data to your stream so you can verify that it is making it to your S3 bucket. A sample is shown in [Figure 7-7](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#sending_test_data_through_a_kinesis_dat).

###### Figure 7-7. Sending test data through a Kinesis Data Firehose

After a few minutes, you will see a folder structure and a file appear in your S3 bucket, similar to [Figure 7-8](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#sthree_destination_with_kinesis_stream).

###### Figure 7-8. S3 destination with Kinesis stream data delivered

If you download and inspect the file, you will see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {"CHANGE":3.95,"PRICE":79.75,"TICKER_SYMBOL":"SLW","SECTOR":"ENERGY"}
    {"CHANGE":7.27,"PRICE":96.37,"TICKER_SYMBOL":"ALY","SECTOR":"ENERGY"}
    {"CHANGE":-5,"PRICE":81.74,"TICKER_SYMBOL":"QXZ","SECTOR":"HEALTHCARE"}
    {"CHANGE":-0.6,"PRICE":98.4,"TICKER_SYMBOL":"NFLX","SECTOR":"TECHNOLOGY"}
    {"CHANGE":-0.46,"PRICE":18.92,"TICKER_SYMBOL":"PLM","SECTOR":"FINANCIAL"}
    {"CHANGE":4.09,"PRICE":100.46,"TICKER_SYMBOL":"ALY","SECTOR":"ENERGY"}
    {"CHANGE":2.06,"PRICE":32.34,"TICKER_SYMBOL":"PPL","SECTOR":"HEALTHCARE"}
    {"CHANGE":-2.99,"PRICE":38.98,"TICKER_SYMBOL":"KFU","SECTOR":"ENERGY"}

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/BigData).

## Discussion

As you begin to ingest data from various sources, your application may be consuming or reacting to streaming data in real time. In some cases, you may want to store the data from the stream to query or process it later. You can use Kinesis Data Firehose to deliver data to object storage (S3), Amazon Redshift, OpenSearch, and many third-party endpoints. You can also connect multiple delivery streams to a single producer stream to deliver data if you have to support multiple delivery locations from your streams.

###### Note

Kinesis Data Firehose scales automatically to handle the volume of data you need to deliver, meaning that you do not have to configure or provision additional resources if your data stream starts to receive large volumes of data. For more information on Kinesis Data Firehose features and capabilities, see the [AWS documentation](https://oreil.ly/9h2Bc) for Kinesis Data Firehose.

If you need to transform data before it ends up in the destination via Firehose, you can configure transformations. A transformation will automatically invoke a Lambda function as your streaming data queues up (see this Firehose [article](https://oreil.ly/PW0LN) for buffer size information). This is useful when you have to adjust the schema of a record before delivery, sanitize data for long-term storage on the fly (e.g., remove personally identifiable information), or join the data with other sources before delivery. The transformation Lambda function you invoke must follow the convention specified by the Kinesis Data Firehose API. To see some examples of Lambda functions, go to the [AWS Serverless Application Repository](https://oreil.ly/q7noh) and search for “firehose.”

### Challenge

Configure a Firehose delivery with transformations to remove a field from the streaming data before delivery.

# 7.3 Automatically Discovering Metadata with AWS Glue Crawlers

## Problem

You have CSV data files on object storage, and you would like to discover the schema and metadata about the files to use in further analysis and query operations.

## Solution

Create an AWS Glue database, follow the crawler configuration wizard to configure a crawler to scan your S3 bucket data, run the crawler, and inspect the resulting table, as shown in [Figure 7-9](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#automatically_discover_me-id0000027).

###### Figure 7-9. Automatically discover metadata with AWS Glue crawlers

### Prerequisite

  * An S3 bucket

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/BigData).

### Steps

  1. Log in to the AWS Console and navigate to the AWS Glue console, choose Databases from the left navigation menu and select “Add database,” as shown in [Figure 7-10](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#creating_a_database_in_the_glue_data_ca).

###### Figure 7-10. Creating a database in the Glue data catalog

  2. Give your database a name (e.g., **`awscookbook703`**) and click Create. A sample dialog box is shown in [Figure 7-11](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#database_name_dialog_box).

###### Figure 7-11. Database name dialog box

  3. Select Tables from the left navigation menu and choose “Add tables” → “Add tables using a crawler,” as shown in [Figure 7-12](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#adding_a_table_to_the_glue_data_catalog).

###### Figure 7-12. Adding a table to the Glue Data catalog

  4. Follow the “Add crawler” wizard. For the crawler source type, choose “Data stores,” crawl all folders, S3 as “Data store” (do not define a Connection), choose your S3 bucket and “data” folder in “Include path,” and do not choose a sample size. Choose to create an IAM role, and suffix it with **`AWSCookbook703`**. For a frequency, choose “Run on demand,” and select the database you created in step 2. Confirm the configuration on the “Review all steps” page and click Finish. An example review page is shown in [Figure 7-13](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#review_settings_for_glue_crawler).

###### Figure 7-13. Review settings for Glue crawler

  5. From the left navigation menu, select Crawlers. Choose the crawler that you created in step 4 and click “Run crawler,” as shown in [Figure 7-14](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#glue_crawler_configuration_summary).

###### Note

The Glue crawler will take a few moments to run. Once it is complete, you can view the table properties of the discovered schema and metadata.

###### Figure 7-14. Glue crawler configuration summary

#### Validation checks

Verify the crawler configuration you created; you can use the AWS CLI or the Glue console. Note the LastCrawl status of SUCCEEDED:
    
    
    aws glue get-crawler --name awscookbook703

You should see output similar to this:
    
    
    {
      "Crawler": {
        "Name": "awscookbook703",
        "Role": "service-role/AWSGlueServiceRole-AWSCookbook703",
        "Targets": {
          "S3Targets": [
            {
              "Path": "s3://awscookbook704-<RANDOM_STRING>/data",
              "Exclusions": []
            }
          ],
          "JdbcTargets": [],
          "MongoDBTargets": [],
          "DynamoDBTargets": [],
          "CatalogTargets": []
        },
        "DatabaseName": "awscookbook703",
        "Classifiers": [],
        "RecrawlPolicy": {
          "RecrawlBehavior": "CRAWL_EVERYTHING"
        },
        "SchemaChangePolicy": {
          "UpdateBehavior": "UPDATE_IN_DATABASE",
          "DeleteBehavior": "DEPRECATE_IN_DATABASE"
        },
        "LineageConfiguration": {
          "CrawlerLineageSettings": "DISABLE"
        },
        "State": "READY",
        "CrawlElapsedTime": 0,
        "CreationTime": "2021-10-12T12:45:18-04:00",
        "LastUpdated": "2021-10-12T12:45:18-04:00",
        "LastCrawl": {
          "Status": "SUCCEEDED",
          "LogGroup": "/aws-glue/crawlers",
          "LogStream": "awscookbook703",
          "MessagePrefix": "16e867b7-e972-4ceb-b318-8e78370949d8",
          "StartTime": "2021-10-12T12:54:19-04:00"
        },
        "Version": 1
      }
    }

###### Tip

AWS Glue crawlers log information about their runs to Amazon CloudWatch logs. If you need to debug your crawlers’ activity, you can inspect the logs in the _/aws-glue/crawlers_ log group.

In the Glue console, select the table that was created and click “View properties.” You can also run an AWS CLI command to output the JSON:
    
    
    aws glue get-table --database-name awscookbook703 --name data

The JSON properties should look similar to this:
    
    
    {
      "StorageDescriptor": {
        "cols": {
          "FieldSchema": [
            {
              "name": "title",
              "type": "string",
              "comment": ""
            },
            {
              "name": "other titles",
              "type": "string",
              "comment": ""
            },
            {
              "name": "bl record id",
              "type": "bigint",
              "comment": ""
            }...<SNIP>...
          ]
        },
        "location": "s3://awscookbook703-<RANDOM_STRING>/data/",
        "inputFormat": "org.apache.hadoop.mapred.TextInputFormat",
        "outputFormat": "org.apache.hadoop.hive.ql.io.HiveIgnoreKeyTextOutputFormat",
        "compressed": "false",
        "numBuckets": "-1",
        "SerDeInfo": {
          "name": "",
          "serializationLib": "org.apache.hadoop.hive.serde2.lazy.LazySimpleSerDe",
          "parameters": {
            "field.delim": ","
          }
        },
        "bucketCols": [],
        "sortCols": [],
        "parameters": {
          "skip.header.line.count": "1",
          "sizeKey": "43017100",
          "objectCount": "1",
          "UPDATED_BY_CRAWLER": "awscookbook703",
          "CrawlerSchemaSerializerVersion": "1.0",
          "recordCount": "79367",
          "averageRecordSize": "542",
          "CrawlerSchemaDeserializerVersion": "1.0",
          "compressionType": "none",
          "classification": "csv",
          "columnsOrdered": "true",
          "areColumnsQuoted": "false",
          "delimiter": ",",
          "typeOfData": "file"
        },
        "SkewedInfo": {},
        "storedAsSubDirectories": "false"
      },
      "parameters": {
        "skip.header.line.count": "1",
        "sizeKey": "43017100",
        "objectCount": "1",
        "UPDATED_BY_CRAWLER": "awscookbook703",
        "CrawlerSchemaSerializerVersion": "1.0",
        "recordCount": "79367",
        "averageRecordSize": "542",
        "CrawlerSchemaDeserializerVersion": "1.0",
        "compressionType": "none",
        "classification": "csv",
        "columnsOrdered": "true",
        "areColumnsQuoted": "false",
        "delimiter": ",",
        "typeOfData": "file"
      }
    }

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/BigData).

## Discussion

When you start to ingest and store large amounts of data from various sources to object storage like S3, you may want to temporarily query the data in place without loading into an intermediate database. Since you may not always know the schema or metadata of the data, you need to know some basics about it, such as where the data resides, what the files and partitioning look like, whether it’s structured versus unstructured data, the size of data, and most importantly, the schema of the data. One specific feature of the AWS Glue service, Glue crawlers, allow you to discover metadata about the variety of data you have in storage. [Crawlers](https://oreil.ly/49nom) connect to your data source (in this case, S3 bucket), scan the objects in the source, and populate a Glue Data Catalog database with tables associated with your data’s schema.

###### Note

In addition to S3 bucket sources, you can use crawlers to scan Java Database Connectivity (JDBC) data stores and DynamoDB tables. In the case of a JDBC table, you will need to define a [connection](https://oreil.ly/Gasxy) to allow Glue to use a network connection to your JDBC source.

### Challenge

Configure your crawler to run on an interval so that your tables and metadata are automatically updated.

# 7.4 Querying Files on S3 Using Amazon Athena

## Problem

You need to run a SQL query on CSV files stored on object storage without indexing them.

## Solution

Configure an Amazon Athena results S3 bucket location, create a Data Catalog database and table in the Athena Editor, and run a SQL query on the data in the S3 bucket, as shown in [Figure 7-15](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#query_files_on_sthree-id0000044).

###### Figure 7-15. Query files on S3 using Amazon Athena

### Prerequisite

  * S3 bucket with a CSV file containing data

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/BigData).

### Steps

  1. Log into the AWS Console and go to the Athena console; you should see something similar to [Figure 7-16](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#athena_console).

###### Figure 7-16. Athena console

  2. In the Query Editor, click the Settings tab and configure a Query result location using the S3 bucket that you created and a prefix: _`s3://bucket/folder/object/`_. Click Manage, select the bucket, and click Choose. As an option, you can encrypt the results. See [Figure 7-17](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#athena_results_destination_configuratio) for an example.

###### Figure 7-17. Athena results destination configuration

  3. Back in the Editor tab, run the following SQL statement to create a Data Catalog database:
         
         CREATE DATABASE `awscookbook704db`

You should see output similar to [Figure 7-18](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#database_creation_sql_statement).

###### Figure 7-18. Database creation SQL statement

  4. Run a new statement in the Query Editor to create a table within the database that references the S3 bucket location of the data and the schema of the data. Be sure to replace _`BUCKET_NAME`_ with the name of the bucket that you created:
         
         CREATE EXTERNAL TABLE IF NOT EXISTS default.`awscookbook704table`(
           `title` string, 
           `other titles` string, 
           `bl record id` bigint, 
           `type of resource` string, 
           `content type` string, 
           `material type` string, 
           `bnb number` string, 
           `isbn` string, 
           `name` string, 
           `dates associated with name` string, 
           `type of name` string, 
           `role` string, 
           `all names` string, 
           `series title` string, 
           `number within series` string, 
           `country of publication` string, 
           `place of publication` string, 
           `publisher` string, 
           `date of publication` string, 
           `edition` string, 
           `physical description` string, 
           `dewey classification` string, 
           `bl shelfmark` string, 
           `topics` string, 
           `genre` string, 
           `languages` string, 
           `notes` string)
         ROW FORMAT SERDE 'org.apache.hadoop.hive.serde2.lazy.LazySimpleSerDe' 
         WITH SERDEPROPERTIES (
           'serialization.format' = ',',
           'field.delim' = ','
         ) LOCATION 's3://BUCKET_NAME/data/'
         TBLPROPERTIES ('has_encrypted_data'='false');

###### Tip

You can use an AWS Glue crawler to crawl your data on S3 and keep databases, tables, and metadata up-to-date automatically. See [Recipe 7.3](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#automatically_discover-id000001) for an example of configuring a Glue crawler with this example dataset.

#### Validation checks

Open the Query Editor and run a query to list the rows where the title is “Marvel universe”:
    
    
    SELECT * FROM awscookbook704table WHERE title='"Marvel universe"' LIMIT 100

You should see output similar to [Figure 7-19](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#query_results_in_the_athena_console).

###### Figure 7-19. Query results in the Athena console

Run a SQL query selecting the top 100 rows for the sample dataset:
    
    
    SELECT * FROM awscookbook704table LIMIT 100;

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/BigData).

## Discussion

You may have had to use an extract, transform, load (ETL) process in the past to facilitate querying large amounts of data on demand. This process could have taken hours, if not days, if the volume of data was substantial. In the world of big data, the volume will only increase as time moves on, and you may not know what you need to query for when you initially start to ingest the data. This makes table schema design challenging. Chances are, as you ingest and collect data from various sources, you will be storing it in object storage. This is the _data lake_ concept realized. Being able to query text-based data in place within your data lake is a powerful concept that you can use Amazon Athena for. You can use standard SQL to run queries against data directly on object storage (Amazon S3).

Athena requires knowing some basics about your data before you can run queries. This includes metadata, schema, and data locations. The concepts of [tables, databases, and the Data Catalog](https://oreil.ly/wLxfa) are important to understand so that you can configure the Athena service to meet your needs. As you saw in [Recipe 7.3](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#automatically_discover-id000001), the Glue service can crawl your data to discover this information and keep it up-to-date so that you can always be ready to run queries against your data while it is stored in your data lake. You can use a Glue Data Catalog in the Athena service rather than defining your own schema to save you time.

###### Tip

As you start to increase your usage of S3 as your central data repository (or in other words, a data lake), you may need to use several services together and also start to apply certain levels of permission to allow other team members to interact with and manage the data. [AWS Lake Formation](https://oreil.ly/wStEx) is a managed service that brings services like S3, Glue, and Athena together with a robust permissions engine that can meet your needs.

###### Note

The Athena service will automatically scale for you, running queries in parallel for your large datasets, so you do not have to worry about provisioning any resources. For more information, see the Athena [documentation](https://oreil.ly/hWrqZ).

### Challenge

Configure Athena to use the Glue Data Catalog with a Glue crawler for a source dataset on S3 that you do not have a predefined schema for.

# 7.5 Transforming Data with AWS Glue DataBrew

## Problem

You have data stored in a CSV and need to convert all characters in a column to uppercase before further processing can occur.

## Solution

Start with a sample project in Glue DataBrew using a sample CSV dataset. Wait for the session to initiate and apply an uppercase format operation on the `name` column of the sample set. Inspect the results (see [Figure 7-20](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#transforming_data_with-id0000049)).

###### Figure 7-20. Transforming data with AWS Glue DataBrew

### Steps

  1. In the AWS Console, search for and navigate to the AWS Glue DataBrew console.

  2. Click “Create sample project,” select “Popular names for babies in 2020,” create a new IAM role, enter a role suffix of your choosing, and then click “Create project,” as shown in [Figure 7-21](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#creating_a_sample_project_in_glue_datab). Your session will take a few moments to be prepared, and the status indicator should look similar to [Figure 7-22](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#preparing_a_session_in_glue_databrew).

###### Figure 7-21. Creating a sample project in Glue DataBrew

###### Figure 7-22. Preparing a session in Glue DataBrew

  3. When your session has been prepared, click FORMAT in the menu. Then from the drop-down menu, select “Change to uppercase,” as shown in [Figure 7-23](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#beginning_to_format_a_string_to_upperca).

###### Figure 7-23. Beginning to format a string to uppercase

  4. In the righthand menu, set the “Source column” to “name” and then click Apply, as shown in [Figure 7-24](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#formatting_column_to_uppercase_interfac).

###### Figure 7-24. Formatting column to uppercase interface

#### Validation checks

View the updated name column, as shown in [Figure 7-25](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#results_of_the_uppercase_recipe_step).

###### Figure 7-25. Results of the uppercase recipe step

From the ACTIONS menu in the top-right corner, select Download CSV, as shown in [Figure 7-26](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch07.html#downloading_csv_action).

###### Figure 7-26. Downloading CSV action

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/BigData).

## Discussion

When dealing with large amounts of heterogeneous data from various sources, you will find that you need to manipulate data in various ways to meet your use case. In the past, you would have to programmatically accomplish this using scripts, complicated ETL jobs, or third-party tools. You can use AWS DataBrew to streamline the tasks of formatting, cleaning, and extracting information from your data. You can perform complex joins and splits, and run custom functions within the DataBrew service using a visual interface.

DataBrew is an example of a [low-code development platform](https://oreil.ly/GKEer) (LCDP) that enables you to quickly achieve outcomes that otherwise would require knowledge of more complicated development platforms. You use Glue DataBrew in your web browser to visually design [recipe jobs](https://oreil.ly/fNFFY) to process your data, preview results, and automate your data-processing workflow. Once you have a recipe job saved, you can bring automation into your workflow by setting up an S3 trigger for your incoming data to have DataBrew process it and deliver it back to S3, the Glue Data Catalog, or a JDBC data source.

### Challenge

Upload your own dataset. Create a job from the DataBrew console, configure it to deliver the results to S3 so you can use the job on demand or automatically with a trigger.