# Chapter 9. Account Management

# 9.0 Introduction

While the previous chapters have focused on deploying and configuring resources _inside_ your AWS account, we want to provide some recipes that show examples of what you can do at the whole account level.

As you continue to scale your AWS usage, you will find it useful to have tools and services available to ease the burden of management, especially if you start to add additional AWS accounts to your environment. We are seeing more and more people choose to use AWS accounts as “containers” for their specific applications. Some companies provide individual accounts for production and nonproduction workloads to business units within a company; some even set up “shared services” accounts to provide internal services to business units within a company to share common resources across the many accounts they may be managing. Your AWS account [spans Regions](https://oreil.ly/INVpe) to give you global capabilities, as shown in [Figure 9-1](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#aws_account_perspective).

###### Figure 9-1. AWS account perspective

We like to think of the tools and services that AWS provides as building blocks that you can use to customize your cloud environment to meet your specific needs. Some of these can be used at an account level to give you more management capabilities over your environments as you scale (i.e., adding additional team members or adding additional AWS accounts). You can organize and consolidate billing for many accounts by using [AWS Organizations](https://aws.amazon.com/organizations) and provide centralized access management through [AWS Single Sign-On](https://aws.amazon.com/single-sign-on), both of which you will explore in the recipes in this chapter, in addition to some recipes to help you configure and maintain a secure environment at the account level.

###### Tip

You should always keep an eye on the [AWS Prescriptive Guidance](https://aws.amazon.com/prescriptive-guidance) website for the most up-to-date guidance on account-level capabilities and recommendations.

## Workstation Configuration

You will need a few things installed to be ready for the recipes in this chapter.

### General setup

Follow the [“General workstation setup steps for CLI recipes”](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/preface01.html#general_workstation_setup_steps_for_cli) to validate your configuration and set up the required environment variables. Then, clone the chapter code repository:
    
    
    git clone https://github.com/AWSCookbook/AccountManagement

# 9.1 Using EC2 Global View for Account Resource Analysis

## Problem

You have been presented with an AWS account for a client. You need to export a CSV file containing all provisioned compute instances, disk volumes, and network resources across all Regions within an AWS account.

## Solution

Navigate to EC2 Global View in the AWS Console. Export a CSV of resources in your account (see [Figure 9-2](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#generating_a_csv_of_resources_with_ectw)).

###### Figure 9-2. Generating a CSV of resources with EC2 Global View

### Prerequisite

  * AWS account with resources deployed

### Steps

  1. In the AWS Console, search for and then click EC2 Global View, as shown in [Figure 9-3](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#searching_for_global_view).

###### Figure 9-3. Searching for Global View

  2. Navigate to the “Global search” menu and click Download CSV (see [Figure 9-4](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#downloading_a_csv_from_global_view)).

###### Figure 9-4. Downloading a CSV from Global View

#### Validation checks

Open the downloaded CSV file in your favorite editor on your workstation. From there, you should be able to scroll through resources in your AWS account.

## Discussion

You may find yourself often working in new AWS accounts as part of your job. If you are in a lab environment or a hackathon, using Global View is a great way for you to get an idea of what an AWS account contains. Before you begin to make changes in an account, it is important to take stock of what is already deployed across all Regions. Having this knowledge will allow you to ensure that you don’t mistakenly cause any outages.

While you should use tools like [AWS Config](https://aws.amazon.com/config) and the AWS Billing console for inspecting the configuration of resources inside your AWS account and keeping an eye on your bill, respectively, it is good to know that you can easily generate a list of EC2 and VPC resources. Routine CSV exports at different times can be used to provide a point-in-time snapshot.

### Challenge

Use the Global search functionality to list all default VPC security groups. You can then double-check inbound rules for extraneous permissions.

# 9.2 Modifying Tags for Many Resources at One Time with Tag Editor

## Problem

You need to add a tag to multiple resources in your AWS account where it doesn’t already exist.

## Solution

Launch the Tag Editor in the AWS Console. Find all resources that have an Environment key with nonexisting value. Add the tag (see [Figure 9-5](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#adding_a_tag_to_multiple_resources)).

###### Figure 9-5. Adding a tag to multiple resources

### Prerequisite

  * AWS account with resources deployed and tagged

### Steps

  1. In the AWS Console, search for Tag Editor and then click Resource Groups & Tag Editor, as shown in [Figure 9-6](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#searching_for_tag_editor_in_the_aws_con).

###### Figure 9-6. Searching for Tag Editor in the AWS Console

  2. From the lefthand menu, click Tag Editor under the Tagging heading (see [Figure 9-7](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#launching_tag_editor-id0000013)).

###### Figure 9-7. Launching Tag Editor

  3. Set “Resource types” to “All supported resource types,” enter a Tag key named **`Environment`** , use the drop-down menu to select “(not tagged)” for the value, and then click “Search resources” (see [Figure 9-8](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#launching_tag_editor-id0000039)).

###### Figure 9-8. Launching Tag Editor

  4. Wait a few moments for the search to complete. Then view the results, select the resources that you wish to tag, and click “Manage tags of selected resources” (see [Figure 9-9](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#viewing_search_results_in_tag_editor)).

###### Figure 9-9. Viewing search results in Tag Editor

  5. Enter a “Tag key” named **`Environment`** , enter a “Tag value” **`Dev`** , and click “Review and apply tag changes” (see [Figure 9-10](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#tagging_multiple_resources_with_tag_edi)).

###### Figure 9-10. Tagging multiple resources with Tag Editor

  6. In the pop-up window, confirm your selection by clicking “Apply changes to all selected” (see [Figure 9-11](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#confirming_changes_to_apply_to_resource)).

###### Figure 9-11. Confirming changes to apply to resources in Tag Editor

#### Validation checks

Use the CLI to confirm that all EC2 instances have an Environment tag:
    
    
    aws ec2 describe-instances \
      --output text \
      --query 'Reservations[].Instances[?!not_null(Tags[?Key == `Environment`].Value)] | [].[InstanceId]'

You should see no output. You can also repeat step 3 to confirm that all resources now have an Environment tag.

## Discussion

A tag consists of a key and a value and can be applied to many resources at the time of creation and almost all resources after creation. You should implement your own tagging strategy as early as possible in your cloud journey. This ensures that you can identify the growing number of resources you deploy over the lifespan of your AWS account. Tags are useful for auditing, billing, scheduling updates, delegating access to resources with specific tags, and so on.

[Cost allocation tags](https://oreil.ly/YvgIT) can help you make sense of your AWS bill, to see exactly which resources are contributing to certain portions of your bill. In addition to the cost allocation report, you can filter by tags interactively via Cost Explorer in the AWS Billing console to analyze and visualize your costs.

The Tag Editor can help you search and perform batch updates for tags across your AWS resources. Say you might have deployed many resources but forgot to tag them all, or you have historically not used tags and would like to start. You can batch select many resources within the Tag Editor (across all Regions or within a selected set of Regions) and perform these updates to ease the burden of implementing a tagging strategy.

While not an exhaustive list, here are some good tags to include as part of a tagging baseline:

`CreatedBy`
    

The User or Identity that created the resource

`Application`
    

The service or application of which the resource is a component

`CostCenter`
    

Useful for billing identification and to help implement a chargeback model for shared AWS account usage

`CreationDate`
    

The date the resource was created

`Contact`
    

An email address for the team or individual in case of any issues with the resource (also helpful for configuring automated alerts)

`MaintenanceWindow`
    

Useful for defining a window of time that the resource is allowed to not be available in case of patching, updates, or maintenance

`DeletionDate`
    

Useful for development or sandbox environments so that you know when it may be safe to delete a resource

### Challenge

Apply a baseline set of tags to your AWS resources and begin to enforce the tags with a [tag policy](https://oreil.ly/7UePx) by enabling [AWS Organizations](https://oreil.ly/Dg3I6).

# 9.3 Enabling CloudTrail Logging for Your AWS Account

## Problem

You just set up your AWS account and want to retain an audit log of all activity for all Regions in your account.

## Solution

Configure an S3 bucket with a bucket policy allowing CloudTrail to write events. Enable CloudTrail for all Regions in your account and configure CloudTrail to log all audit events to the S3 bucket, as shown in [Figure 9-12](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#turning_on_logging_for_cloudtrail).

###### Figure 9-12. Turning on logging for CloudTrail

### Prerequisite

  * S3 bucket for logging

### Preparation

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/BigData).

### Steps

  1. Create a file called _cloudtrail-s3policy-template.json_ (file provided in the repository):
         
         {
           "Version": "2012-10-17",
           "Statement": [
             {
               "Sid": "S3CloudTrail",
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Principal": {"Service": "cloudtrail.amazonaws.com"},
               "Action": "s3:GetBucketAcl",
               "Resource": "arn:aws:s3:::BUCKET_NAME"
             },
             {
               "Sid": "S3CloudTrail",
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Principal": {"Service": "cloudtrail.amazonaws.com"},
               "Action": "s3:PutObject",
               "Resource": "arn:aws:s3:::BUCKET_NAME/AWSLogs/AWS_ACCOUNT_ID/*",
               "Condition": {"StringEquals": {"s3:x-amz-acl": "bucket-owner-full-control"}}
             }
           ]
         }

  2. Replace the values in the _cloudtrail-s3policy-template.json_ file with values from your deployment. Here is a way to do it quickly with `sed`:
         
         sed -e "s/BUCKET_NAME/awscookbook903-$RANDOM_STRING/g" \
              -e "s|AWS_ACCOUNT_ID|${AWS_ACCOUNT_ID}|g" \
              cloudtrail-s3policy-template.json > cloudtrail-s3policy.json

  3. Add the S3 bucket policy to your S3 bucket:
         
         aws s3api put-bucket-policy \
              --bucket awscookbook903-$RANDOM_STRING \
              --policy file://cloudtrail-s3policy.json

  4. Enable CloudTrail for all AWS Regions and configure the S3 bucket to send logs to the following:
         
         aws cloudtrail create-trail --name AWSCookbook903Trail \
              --s3-bucket-name awscookbook903-$RANDOM_STRING \
              --is-multi-region-trail

  5. Start the logging of your CloudTrail trail:
         
         aws cloudtrail start-logging --name AWSCookbook903Trail

###### Note

More information can be found on AWS for the required [S3 bucket policy](https://oreil.ly/jhcXQ) for CloudTrail logging.

#### Validation checks

Describe the trail:
    
    
    aws cloudtrail describe-trails --trail-name-list AWSCookbook903Trail

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {
      "trailList": [
      {
        "Name": "AWSCookbook903Trail",
        "S3BucketName": "awscookbook903-<<string>>",
        "IncludeGlobalServiceEvents": true,
        "IsMultiRegionTrail": true,
        "HomeRegion": "us-east-1",
        "TrailARN": "arn:aws:cloudtrail:us-east-1:<<Account Id>>:trail/AWSCookbook903Trail",
        "LogFileValidationEnabled": false,
        "HasCustomEventSelectors": false,
        "HasInsightSelectors": false,
        "IsOrganizationTrail": false
      }
      ]
    }

Get the trail status:
    
    
    aws cloudtrail get-trail-status --name AWSCookbook903Trail

You should see output similar to the following:
    
    
    {
      "IsLogging": true,
      "StartLoggingTime": "2021-06-28T21:22:56.308000-04:00",
      "LatestDeliveryAttemptTime": "",
      "LatestNotificationAttemptTime": "",
      "LatestNotificationAttemptSucceeded": "",
      "LatestDeliveryAttemptSucceeded": "",
      "TimeLoggingStarted": "2021-06-29T01:22:56Z",
      "TimeLoggingStopped": ""
    }

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Security).

## Discussion

You can use CloudTrail to log and continuously monitor all events in your AWS account. Specifically, events refer to all API activity against the AWS APIs. These include actions that you (and all authenticated entities) take in the console, via the command line, API activity from your applications, and other AWS services performing actions (automatic actions like autoscaling, EventBridge triggers, replication, etc.).

###### Tip

You can query your logs in place on S3 using Amazon Athena if you are looking for specific events, and you can index your logs with [Amazon OpenSearch](https://oreil.ly/gdkRW) to perform complex queries against your historical data.

You should use CloudTrail from a security standpoint, but you can also use it from an application debugging standpoint. Say you have an event-driven application that triggers a Lambda function when you upload files to an S3 bucket (see [Recipe 5.7](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch05.html#automating_csv_import_into_dynamodb_fro)). If your IAM policy is incorrect for the Lambda function invocation, you will be able to see the `Deny` in the CloudTrail logs. This is helpful for application developers and architects who are building and designing event-driven applications powered by Amazon EventBridge.

### Challenge

Configure an [organizational trail](https://oreil.ly/4qAbK) if you have an AWS Organization with multiple accounts. (See [Recipe 9.6](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#setting_up_aws_organizations_and_aws_si) to set up an AWS Organization.)

# 9.4 Setting Up Email Alerts for Root Login

## Problem

You want to be notified by email when the root user logs into an AWS account.

## Solution

Create an SNS topic and subscribe to it. Then create an Amazon EventBridge rule with a pattern that searches for root logins and triggers the SNS topic, as shown in [Figure 9-13](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#logging_and_alerting_for_root_logins).

###### Figure 9-13. Logging and alerting for root logins

### Prerequisite

  * AWS account with CloudTrail enabled (see [Recipe 9.3](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#enabling_cloudtrail_logging_for_your_aw))

### Steps

  1. Create an SNS topic:
         
         TOPIC_ARN=$(aws sns create-topic \
              --name root-login-notify-topic \
              --output text --query TopicArn)

  2. Subscribe to the SNS topic. This will send a confirmation email to the address you specify:
         
         aws sns subscribe \
              --topic-arn $TOPIC_ARN \
              --protocol email \
              --notification-endpoint [your-email@example.com](mailto:your-email@example.com)

  3. Locate the confirmation email in your inbox that AWS sent and click “Confirm subscription.”

In the root of this chapter’s repository, `cd` to the _904-Setting-Up-Email-Alerts-for-Root-Login_ directory and follow the subsequent steps.

  4. Now create an assume-role policy JSON statement called _assume-role-policy.json_ to use in the next step (this file is provided in the repository):
         
         {
           "Version": "2012-10-17",
           "Statement": [
             {
               "Effect": "Allow",
               "Principal": {
                 "Service": "events.amazonaws.com"
               },
               "Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
             }
           ]
         }

  5. Create the role and specify the _assume-role-policy.json_ file:
         
         aws iam create-role --role-name AWSCookbook904RuleRole \
              --assume-role-policy-document \
              file://assume-role-policy.json

  6. Now attach the managed `AmazonSNSFullAccess` IAM policy to the IAM role:
         
         aws iam attach-role-policy \
              --policy-arn arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonSNSFullAccess \
              --role-name AWSCookbook904RuleRole

  7. Create a file called _event-pattern.json_ for AWS Console sign-in events (file provided in the repository):
         
         {
           "detail-type": [
           "AWS API Call via CloudTrail",
           "AWS Console Sign In via CloudTrail"
           ],
           "detail": {
           "userIdentity": {
             "type": [
               "Root"
             ]
           }
           }
         }

  8. Create an EventBridge rule that monitors the trail for root login activity:
         
         aws events put-rule --name "AWSCookbook904Rule" \
              --role-arn "arn:aws:iam::$AWS_ACCOUNT_ID:role/AWSCookbook904RuleRole" --event-pattern file://event-
         pattern.json

  9. Set the target for your EventBridge rule to your SNS topic:
         
         aws events put-targets --rule AWSCookbook904Rule \
              --targets "Id"="1","Arn"="$TOPIC_ARN"

#### Validation checks

Log in to your AWS account using your root account, wait a few minutes, and check your email for a message from SNS.

### Cleanup

Follow the steps in this recipe’s folder in the [chapter code repository](https://github.com/AWSCookbook/Security).

## Discussion

Setting up an alert to notify you on root user sign-ins is a detective mechanism you can layer into your security strategy to keep aware of unwelcome activity within your account. This method is a cost-effective solution to monitor your AWS account for unintended access via the root user. Since the root user is the most powerful and privileged identity (and should be used only for specific infrequent tasks), it is important to know when it is accessed.

###### Note

In some cases, the root user is needed to perform specific privileged actions and tasks within an AWS account. For a list of these actions requiring the root user, refer to the AWS [support document](https://oreil.ly/NvidX).

### Challenge

Add another EventBridge rule that notifies the same SNS topic when the root password is changed (here is a [hint](https://oreil.ly/vzvwz)).

# 9.5 Setting Up Multi-Factor Authentication for a Root User

## Problem

You need to enable multi-factor authentication for the root user of your AWS account.

## Solution

Log in to your AWS account with your root user credentials. Navigate to the IAM console and enable multi-factor authentication using a U2F-compatible hardware device or a [Time-Based One-Time Password (TOTP)](https://oreil.ly/TtQtd)–compliant virtual device (see [Figure 9-14](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#enabling_mfa_for_the_root_user_in_your)).

###### Figure 9-14. Enabling MFA for the root user in your AWS account

### Steps

  1. Log in to the [AWS Console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/) by using the email address associated with your root user. You can reset the password for the root user by using the “Forgot password” link displayed after you enter the root user email address; click Next. The login dialog you should see is shown in [Figure 9-15](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#selecting_the_root_user_login_option).

###### Figure 9-15. Selecting the root user login option

###### Tip

Since you will log in with the root user infrequently, you do not need to store the password for the user once you enable MFA. You can [reset the password](https://oreil.ly/ar0H9) each time you need to access the account; take care to secure access to the mailbox associated with your root user.

  2. Once you are logged in to the AWS Console, select [My Security Credentials](https://oreil.ly/z5xsh) from the top right of the user interface, as shown in [Figure 9-16](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#navigating_to_the_my_security_credentia).

  3. Expand the “Multi-factor authentication” pane on the Your Security Credentials page within the IAM console and click the Activate MFA button. Choose the [type of device](https://oreil.ly/VVL9g) you will use and click Continue (see [Figure 9-17](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#selecting_a_virtual_mfa_device)).

###### Warning

If you use a software-based password manager utility to store your virtual MFA device information, do not store your root user password in that same password manager. If your password manager utility or vault is compromised, your second factor and password together give the ability to access your AWS account. Similarly, the password information for your email account should not be stored in the same place as your virtual MFA device, since the root user password-reset procedure can be performed successfully with access to the mailbox associated with your root user.

###### Figure 9-17. Selecting a virtual MFA device

  4. Follow the prompts to either display a QR code that you can scan with your virtual device or plug in your hardware token and follow the prompts. Once you enter the code, you will see a window indicating that you have completed the MFA setup (see [Figure 9-18](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#confirmation_of_mfa_device_setup)).

###### Figure 9-18. Confirmation of MFA device setup

###### Tip

You can print out a copy of the QR code displayed and keep this in a physically secure location as a backup in case you lose access to your virtual MFA device.

#### Validation checks

Sign out of your AWS account and sign back in with the root user. Enter the code generated by your virtual device (or plug in your hardware token) and complete the login process.

### Cleanup

You should always keep MFA enabled for your root user. If you would like to disable the MFA device associated with your root user, follow the steps for [deactivating the device](https://oreil.ly/pvpVw).

## Discussion

The [root user](https://oreil.ly/qNtiE) is the most powerful and privileged identity of an AWS account. The username is an email address that you configure when you first establish your AWS account, and password-reset requests can be made from the AWS Console or by contacting AWS support. If your email account is compromised, a malicious actor could request a reset of your root account password and gain access to your account. The root user should always be protected with a second factor of authentication to prevent unauthorized access to your account. Since the root user is needed on only [rare occasions](https://oreil.ly/Em4TW), you should never use it for routine tasks.

###### Tip

You need to enable IAM user and role access to the Billing console. You can follow the AWS [steps](https://oreil.ly/DVPbZ) to perform that action and further reduce your dependency on using the root user for tasks.

It is extremely important to configure an IAM user (or set up federated access using ADFS with IAM, SAML with IAM, or AWS Single Sign-On) rather than use the root user to log in to your AWS account for your routine usage. [AWS recommends immediately creating an administrative IAM user](https://oreil.ly/MuSdE) as one of the first things you do when you open an AWS account, shortly after you enable MFA for the root user. For a scalable approach, you can follow [Recipe 9.6](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#setting_up_aws_organizations_and_aws_si) to enable and use AWS Single Sign-On for your own (and delegated) access requirements.

### Challenge

Configure MFA protection for other IAM roles (using trust policies) in your account (here is a [hint](https://oreil.ly/e8YMQ)).

# 9.6 Setting Up AWS Organizations and AWS Single Sign-On

## Problem

You need a scalable way to centrally manage usernames and passwords to access your AWS accounts.

## Solution

Enable AWS Organizations, configure AWS Single Sign-On, create a group, create a permission set, and create a user in the AWS SSO directory for you to use, as shown in [Figure 9-19](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#aws_sso_view_of_permissions_and_users).

###### Figure 9-19. AWS SSO view of permissions and users

### Steps

  1. Navigate to [AWS Organizations](https://console.aws.amazon.com/organizations) in the AWS Console and click “Create an organization.”

###### Tip

AWS Organizations provides many features that enable you to work with multiple AWS accounts at scale. For more information, see the [AWS Organizations documentation](https://oreil.ly/Wdaa4).

  2. The organization creation will trigger an email to be sent to the email address associated with the root user of your account. Confirm the creation of the organization by clicking the “Verify your email address” button.

  3. Navigate to the [AWS SSO console](https://console.aws.amazon.com/singlesignon) in your Region and click the Enable SSO button.

###### Note

The initial configuration of AWS SSO uses a local directory for your users. You can federate to an existing user directory you may have, like Active Directory or a SAML provider. For information on configuring federation, the [user guide for AWS SSO](https://oreil.ly/PeusI) provides details.

  4. Go to the Groups portion of the SSO console and click “Create group.” Enter the required Group name and click Create, as shown in [Figure 9-20](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#creating_a_group_in_aws_sso).

###### Figure 9-20. Creating a group in AWS SSO

  5. Go to the Users portion of the SSO console and select “Add user.” Enter the information required in the fields, add the user to the group you created, and select Create. You can have the AWS SSO console generate the initial password for you or send an email to the address provided in the required “Email address” field. Assign the user to the group that you created in step 4 on the second page of the “Add user” wizard (see [Figure 9-21](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#creating_a_user_in_aws_sso)).

###### Figure 9-21. Creating a user in AWS SSO

  6. Go to the AWS Accounts portion of the SSO console (in the left navigation menu of the console), choose the “Permission sets” tab, and select “Create permission set.” Choose the “Use an existing job function policy” option and select `PowerUserAccess` (see [Figure 9-22](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#creating_a_permission_set_in_aws_sso)).

###### Figure 9-22. Creating a permission set in AWS SSO

  7. To assign the permission set to the group you created for your AWS account, click the AWS accounts link in the left navigation menu, choose the “AWS organization” tab, select your AWS account from the list of accounts, and click “Assign users.” Click the Groups tab and choose the group that you added your user to in step 4, as shown in [Figure 9-23](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#adding_a_group_to_an_assignment). Click “Next: Permission sets.”

###### Figure 9-23. Adding a group to an assignment

  8. Select the permission set you created in step 6 and click Finish (see [Figure 9-24](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/aws-cookbook/9781492092599/ch09.html#assigning_a_permission_set_in_aws_sso)).

###### Figure 9-24. Assigning a permission set in AWS SSO

###### Note

When you click Finish, members of this group can access the AWS account you specified using with permissions of the `PowerUserAccess` IAM policy. AWS SSO provisions a role that can be assumed in your AWS account for this purpose. Do not modify this role via IAM in your AWS account, or the permission set will not be able to be used through AWS SSO.

#### Validation checks

Go to the URL provided on the AWS SSO console dashboard page and log in with the username and password of the user that you created in step 5. Choose either “Management console” or “Command line or programmatic access” to gain `PowerUserAccess` to your AWS account.

###### Tip

The default URL is generated when you first enable AWS SSO. You can create a customized URL for your own purposes by clicking the Customize link next to the default URL in the SSO console.

### Cleanup

Go to the AWS SSO console and select Settings from the left navigation menu. Scroll down to the bottom of the settings page and select “Delete AWS SSO Configuration.” Confirm the deletion by selecting the checkboxes and clicking “Delete AWS SSO.”

Go to AWS Organizations, select your organization, open the settings for your organization, and select “Delete organization.” You will need to verify the organization ID and confirm the deletion of the organization from the email address associated with the root user of your AWS account.

## Discussion

When you enable AWS Organizations, the account where you initially create your organization is known as the [management account](https://oreil.ly/UTrvA). While you enabled AWS Organizations so that you could use AWS Single Sign-On in this recipe, it primarily exists for governing, organizing, and managing AWS accounts at scale. Some account management capabilities that you might be interested in include, but are not limited to, these:

  * Consolidating billing for multiple AWS accounts

  * Managing group accounts using [organizational units](https://oreil.ly/ZLn6v) (OUs)

  * Applying [service control policies](https://oreil.ly/DeR3h) (SCPs) to individual accounts or OUs

  * [Centralizing policies](https://oreil.ly/4s2Nx) for tagging and backups for all accounts within your organization

  * Sharing resources across accounts using [Resource Access Manager](https://oreil.ly/eiNlp) (RAM)

AWS Organizations and AWS SSO are free to enable and provide a scalable way for you to begin to manage AWS accounts and user access to your entire AWS environment. As a [best practice](https://oreil.ly/rZ02g), using the management account for management functions only (and not running workloads) is a pattern you should adopt. Creating specific AWS accounts for your production and nonproduction workloads that are members of your AWS Organization helps you isolate your workloads and reduce blast radius, delegate access, manage your billing, and so on.

###### Tip

These concepts begin to define the concept of a [_landing zone_](https://oreil.ly/X9vg1). Rather than build your own, you can use [AWS Control Tower](https://oreil.ly/DzWXI) to configure a fully managed landing zone. There are advantages of using Control Tower when you plan to scale your AWS usage beyond just a few accounts.

AWS Single Sign-On provides a secure and scalable way to manage user access to your AWS accounts. You can integrate with an external identity provider (IdP) or use the built-in directory within AWS SSO, depending on how many users you need to manage and if you already have an external user directory.

When you successfully authenticate with AWS SSO, you are presented with a choice of access levels defined by [permission sets](https://oreil.ly/t3wOC). Permission sets use an IAM policy definition that SSO uses to manage a role, which you can assume upon successful login. AWS provides permission sets within SSO that align with common job functions, but you can also create your own custom permission sets by writing IAM policy statements and saving them as a permission set. A temporary session is created once you choose your access level into an account. You can use the session within the AWS Console, or via the command line with the [temporary access key ID, secret access key, and session token variables](https://oreil.ly/Uz8BT), or by [using the AWS CLI v2 to authenticate with SSO from the command line](https://oreil.ly/qLcUl). You can [adjust the length of the session duration](https://oreil.ly/nXfAi) within the AWS SSO console.

Security around the access to your AWS environments should be your top priority, and as you scale the number of users and accounts, and level of access delegated, this becomes a challenge. AWS SSO gives you a mechanism to implement security at scale for your AWS environments. Since the session you initiate with your account via AWS SSO is temporary, you do not need to create long-lived [IAM access keys](https://oreil.ly/bk0L7) to use in your command-line environment, which is one less secret to have to rotate and manage. You can also use multi-factor authentication with AWS SSO and require MFA for login.

### Challenge 1

Connect AWS SSO to an [external identity provider](https://oreil.ly/Ra2r6) for an existing IdP-like Active Directory or Okta.

### Challenge 2

Apply a [service control policy](https://oreil.ly/6KWR4) (SCP) to limit the Regions you can use within your AWS account.