# Chapter 1. Introduction to Cloud Microservices

Cloud computing and microservices [have become a dominant theme](https://oreil.ly/tPh02) in the software architecture world. Microservices have added complexity to an era in which security attacks are far too common, and they have raised the importance of security practitioners in every organization.

This is a story (that I heard for the first time on [YouTube](https://oreil.ly/nsNzy)) that may sound familiar to many of you. A fast-paced company is building a microservices-based application and you are on the security team. It is possible that you have stakeholders, such as a CEO or a product manager, who want your product to be launched in time to gain market share. The developers in your company are doing their best to meet deadlines and ship code faster. You are brought in at the end of the process, and your mandate is to make sure that the final product is secure. This should immediately raise red flags to you. If the product is developed independently of you (the security team), you will be the only ones standing in the way of a product that adds value to the company. In my experience, in many dysfunctional firms, security professionals have been viewed as naysayers by development teams, product managers, and other stakeholders at organizations.

The problem with superficial security initiatives is that they interfere with value-adding activities. Bad security initiatives are notorious for causing frustration among developers. This is usually due to bad design and poor implementations, both prevalent in the industry. Hence, security policies are, at times, associated with “corporate bureaucracy” and have led, in my experience, to some unpleasant conversations in meeting rooms. This has compelled many developers to sneak around security measures to develop faster. More importantly, since a lot of security initiatives were framed before the era of cloud computing or microservices, they fail to incorporate some of the benefits that new software designs and technologies provide you.

Clearly, there has to be a better way. In this chapter, I aim to show you how incorporating security in the architectural phase of microservice design and then using some of the tools that AWS provides can help in creating systems that are simple, secure, and quick to develop at the same time. I start by talking about some desirable traits in secure systems that are correlated with better security outcomes. I then explain how microservices can help you create systems that have these desirable traits. And finally, I go into how AWS can help you in designing these microservices and scaling them to build a secure system.

# Basics of Cloud Information Security

Before I go into the fundamentals of cloud security, let’s define some basic information security terms since many of them are used interchangeably, sometimes causing confusion:

Vulnerability
    A vulnerability is any deficiency in the system that makes our system less secure. A vulnerability could be anything in the software that could be exploited. This may also be due to the fact that your system uses an older version of the operating system or a library that could be exploited.
Threat
    Just because a vulnerability exists, that doesn’t mean someone will exploit it. Indeed, hidden vulnerabilities can continue to exist in every application, sometimes for years, as in the [Heartbleed bug](https://heartbleed.com/). But the moment the vulnerability becomes exploitable, it can be deemed a _potential threat_. If this vulnerability is exploited, the threat is said to have been _realized_. For example, losing your house key is a vulnerability. A hypothetical thief finding this key is a potential threat. A thief _actually_ finding it is the realization of this threat. A realized threat has a financial, reputational, or operational impact on your organization.
Malicious actor/threat actor/threat agent
    The _threat actor_ (or _threat agent_) is anyone that takes advantage of a vulnerability to cause the threat.
Responsibility
    In the context of security, the _responsibility_ parameter dictates who is responsible for ensuring that a potential threat never becomes reality. This responsibility can be assumed by an employee or automated system or may be offloaded to a third-party product or a service provider. For instance, in the case of banks (branches), the responsibility of preventing physical theft is assumed by the security firms.
Risk
    _Risk_ is the metric that tries to evaluate the probability of a threat being realized that would result in a loss of some kind. This loss may be financial, reputational, or operational. An application’s _aggregate risk_ is the probability-weighted sum of all the threats that it might face. The ultimate goal of any secure design is to reduce the aggregate risk.
Control/countermeasure
    A _control_ or _countermeasure_ is any activity that may result in lowering the aggregate risk (or the negative impact of the potential threat specified by a risk). Controls are usually directed at specific threats and have well-defined scopes. Controls may also be _indirect_ where certain activities indirectly reduce the aggregate risk of the organization (for example, when cybersecurity awareness and training are promoted within the organization, incidents tend to decline).

## Risk and Security Controls

The process of security design includes identifying the controls that can be implemented to reduce the aggregate risk in an organization. For example, organizations where network systems run without firewalls have a higher aggregate risk than those with well-configured firewalls, which is why firewalls are recommended by most security professionals. More specifically, security professionals may add firewalls as a countermeasure against the threat of unauthorized network access. In this case, they identified a potential threat and preemptively implemented a countermeasure to reduce the probability or impact of the threat (and thus, by definition, reduce the risk of the application). This process is known as _threat modeling_.

###### Tip

Many security firms have extensively studied and prepared frameworks for identifying common threat scenarios. One example of a great framework is the [Lockheed Martin cyber kill chain](https://oreil.ly/paGb6), which identifies what the adversaries must complete to achieve their objective.

Security controls are said to be _blunt_ if they unilaterally block all requests without trying to understand their context or specifics (for example, a fence around a house that blocks everyone from crossing over regardless of whether they own the house or not). Controls are said to be _precise_ or _sharp_ if they identify and block specific (potentially unauthorized) requests (for example, a lock on a door that allows those with a key to open it, thus not barring legitimate users, but blocking anyone without access to a key). As a rule of thumb, blunt controls are generally strong and easy to implement. However, they may also cause friction among legitimate users and may prevent employees from doing their jobs. On the other hand, sharp controls can take a significant amount of time to tune properly, even though they are effective. Depending on the application, both of these types of controls may be required to prevent different types of attacks. In [Chapter 2](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch02.html#authorization_and_authentication_basics), I will talk about authorization and authentication controls which are extremely sharp and can provide granular protection against potential threats to the organization. In [Chapter 5](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch05.html#networking_security), I will discuss network security, which acts as a powerful but blunt instrument.

Some controls may not be targeted specifically at potential threats and yet can reduce the aggregate risk of the application. As an example, implementing proper monitoring and alerting may result in quick action by the security team. Organizations may choose to implement strong monitoring systems, called _detective controls_ , to dissuade malicious actors from attacking such systems, thus reducing aggregate risk.

###### Tip

You can think of controls as levers that security professionals can pull in any organization to adjust the security posture and the aggregate risk of any application.

## Organizational Security Policy

It might be tempting to take on every potential threat and implement strong controls against every vulnerability. As with all aspects of software engineering, however, there are trade-offs to this idea.

Many organizations adopt a piecemeal approach toward security controls instead of a holistic one. Very often I find myself in the following situation:

  1. A security professional identifies a very specific vulnerability.

  2. The organization identifies a control or marketplace product that addresses that vulnerability.

  3. The vulnerability may be addressed by the solution from Step 2, but a wider set of vulnerabilities may continue to exist. Such a control may provide a solution without considering the broader implication of the change on the overall application.

  4. Either the control may be too precise, and hence over time additional controls may be required, or the solution may be too broad and hence may get in the way of legitimate activities that developers may perform.

Since _point solutions_ (solutions that have a narrow, specific goal) often have side effects, such as developer friction, it is almost impossible to quantify the true cost of a security control compared to the potential impact of the risk. A number of factors can limit organizations’ ability to mitigate individual vulnerabilities, such as costs, timelines, and revenue targets.

A _security policy_ is an abstract plan that lays out broader the vision for identifying and implementing security controls. Security policies define the role security and controls play in an organization. The purpose of a security policy is to quantify and compare the cost of a potential incident against the cost of implementing a countermeasure. The cost can either be a monetary cost or a cost to the operational efficiency of the organization (something that gets in the way of value-adding activities). The security policy provides the security team with a high-level vision that helps them choose the right controls for the job and decide whether the controls in place are acceptable or need to be sharpened in order to be effective.

###### Tip

If security controls are the levers that can be used to adjust the potential risk of an application, a security policy guides how much each of these levers needs to be pulled to find the sweet spot that is acceptable to senior management. A security policy should be high level and should identify a broad range of threats that you want to protect against. This will allow its implementers to innovate and come up with a broader set of tools that fit well into your organization.

While designing a security policy, it is important to think about the three types of threats: possible, plausible, and probable. A lot of threats are possible. A significantly smaller subset of these threats are plausible. And an even smaller subset of threats are probable. For companies where the impact of security incidents is not significant, it may not be prudent to set up controls against every possible threat, but it may certainly be a good idea to set up controls against all the probable ones. On the other hand, a company operating in a sensitive industry may not be able to afford to ignore some possible threats, even if they are not plausible or probable.

###### Note

This book’s main goal is to help organizations frame and implement controls based on a well-framed security policy. To determine the effectiveness of controls within organizations, several metrics can be utilized, such as the [Center for Internet Security Benchmarks](https://oreil.ly/bHtUN).

## Security Incidents and the CIA Triad

A security incident is said to occur when a potential threat is realized—in other words, a vulnerability has been exploited (possibly by a malicious actor).

Any security incident can compromise one of three different parameters: confidentiality, integrity, and availability. Together, these are called the _[CIA triad](https://oreil.ly/EZQ2r)_ of information security:

Confidentiality
    A security incident where data or information is exposed or leaked to anyone not authorized access to this information is said to affect the confidentiality of the system. Examples of such incidents include sensitive data leaks, password leaks, and so on.
Integrity
    A security incident where an unauthorized change is perpetuated into the system, resulting in an undesired state, is said to affect the integrity of the system. Examples of such incidents include data tampering, viruses, ransomware, and so forth.
Availability
    A security incident where a malicious actor overwhelms the system to prevent it from performing its usual tasks is said to affect the availability of the system. Examples of such an incident include [brute force](https://oreil.ly/txG5C) attacks, [denial of service (DoS)](https://oreil.ly/GKTy2) attacks, and more.

Any security incident or attack may have a negative impact on one or more of these parameters. As security professionals, our job is to quantify the impact of such a risk and compare that to the cost of the countermeasures that may have to be put in place to prevent it from happening.

## AWS Shared Responsibility Model

I have already talked about responsibility in the context of security—it is critical as a security professional to identify who is responsible for protecting against specific threats to applications hosted on AWS. This is where the AWS [Shared Responsibility Model (SRM)](https://oreil.ly/QmVTq) comes into the picture. Understanding the SRM helps you identify potential threats and vulnerabilities for which you need to provide countermeasures instead of relying on AWS to automatically do so.

One simple way of understanding the responsibility split between AWS and the customer is to understand that AWS is responsible for _security of the cloud_. This means AWS is responsible for protecting the infrastructure supporting all the services provided by AWS. This includes physical security of the machines that run the application from theft. AWS assumes the responsibility of making sure that your application runs in a virtualized environment that is logically separated from other clients.

On the other hand, the customer is responsible for security of the application in the cloud. Applying regular security patches on software and implementing proper access control, encryption, and authentication requirements are all part of the responsibilities that AWS expects customers to bear.

###### Warning

More importantly, customers are also expected to have the right configurations in place to enable secure computing practices, in line with their security policy.

An exception to the above rule of thumb is the case of managed AWS services, where AWS assumes a larger responsibility than simply protecting the physical cloud infrastructure. I will elaborate more on that later in the chapter.

###### Tip

If you work in an environment that requires regulatory compliance and has frequent compliance audits, AWS compiles all of its compliance-related documentation under [AWS Artifact](https://aws.amazon.com/artifact). Documentation available on AWS Artifact includes compliance reports and regulatory attestation for managed AWS services. Through AWS Artifact, you can convince auditors of the regulatory compliance of managed AWS services and in effect, your software application.

# Cloud Architecture and Security

Designing secure systems involves looking at software applications by taking a high-level _systems view_. Architects generally aim for the forest instead of trees and frame abstract design principles, while leaving the implementation for the developers. A secure architecture design acts as an enabler for better security controls. You can boost the security posture of your application by following some fundamental security principles when designing the application. You can learn a great deal about the principles of security architecture in the book _Enterprise Security Architecture_ by Nicholas Sherwood (CRC Press).

Although the principles of information security architecture predate microservices and cloud systems, researchers have discovered ways to leverage the benefits of cloud-based microservice systems to reduce the aggregate risk of your application. I review some of these architectural patterns in this section. These patterns are not mutually exclusive. With their help, I will lay the case for why cloud-based microservices reduce the risk to your applications.

## Security Through Modularity

Most modern-day applications are complex. A systems approach to software development considers a software application to be made up of smaller, easier-to-manage modules. A _modular_ application is one that can be broken down into smaller pieces that can be worked on independently. A modular application is easier to patch and hence easier to eliminate vulnerabilities from. Modularization is the key benefit that microservices provide.

From the point of view of security professionals, it is easy to frame a security policy for modular applications since such a policy can be more flexible and can better fit the contours of your application.

## Security Through Simplicity

Simple systems are easier to secure than complex ones. Complexity of software can be destabilizing if you cannot manage it well. Vulnerabilities in small, isolated applications are easier to spot and patch than are those of larger complex projects. If you want a building metaphor, small buildings with limited entrances are easier to secure than complicated mazes. Thus, if your applications are small, you can eliminate vulnerabilities before they become threats, and thus reduce the risk to your applications.

A large modular application composed of smaller, simpler modules ends up being easier to manage and secure. Thus, a guiding principle while designing secure applications is to make them as simple as possible. Any deviation from simplicity should be evaluated, not just in terms of manageability but also for security since it is inherently harder to secure complicated applications.

###### Note

In my experience, the terms _complex_ and _complicated_ are used interchangeably to describe software architectures. In reality, though, they are not the same. A software architecture is _complex_ if it is made up of a vast number of smaller but simpler applications. Complexity is a necessary consequence of scale. _Complicated_ software is software that may be monolithic and may involve large components that may not be easy to understand or secure. Complicated software may require specialized skill to maintain. Organizations should avoid making their applications complicated.

## Security Through Fully Managed AWS Services

I mentioned the AWS SRM, where I talked about how AWS is responsible for the “security of the cloud.” AWS managed services are a way to offload additional responsibility onto AWS.

In a managed service, AWS assumes a larger share of the responsibility of running a specific piece of infrastructure for the user. In the case of running MySQL, AWS offers the AWS Relational Database Service (RDS), which offers multiple MySQL options to end users. On AWS RDS, AWS assumes the responsibility of running and patching the database engine as well as the underlying operating system. AWS keeps the underlying operating system current and eliminates any vulnerabilities that may exist on it.

###### Warning

Just because you use an AWS managed service does not automatically mean that you have zero security responsibilities. You may still be responsible for controlling access to the services and configuring firewalls and other basic security measures. Any time you use a managed service, it is important to figure out how much of the security responsibility is assumed by AWS and how much is still on you as the customer.

With managed AWS services, you can reduce the responsibility of your security team and scale your organization without losing focus. If you replace an existing component of your infrastructure with an AWS managed service, you can trust that AWS will provide you with the right countermeasures to reduce your application’s risk.

###### Tip

The use of managed services may reduce the burden of meeting compliance requirements as well, since most managed services are compliant with most regulatory requirements (HIPAA, HITRUST, GDPR, SOC, NIST, ISO, PCI, and FedRAMP). Throughout the book, I will recommend the use of a fleet of managed AWS services that help in increasing the security.

## Blast Radius, Isolation, and the Locked Rooms Analogy

Let me take you back to the process of threat modeling. In this process, you identify vulnerabilities in the application and then start thinking of potential threat actors who could exploit these. You build hypothetical scenarios where you assume that the malicious actor has indeed exploited this vulnerability and has caused unauthorized issues to your application, affecting any of the CIA metrics that you have been tracking.

The parts of your application that the hypothetical threat actor in your threat-modeling scenario may have influence over is called the _blast radius_ (also known as _attack surface_) of your application.

In a well-architected system, you want to keep this blast radius at a minimum. That way, even if a threat actor is able to gain unauthorized access, the rest of the application is able to function. From an architectural standpoint, it is possible to achieve this goal of reducing blast radiuses by using the concept of _isolation_. You can think of a large modular application as a series of locked rooms in a building. The fact that one of the rooms was breached by an unauthorized person does not mean the other rooms will be as well. You can have a modular application in which individual modules are isolated from one another and require strong authentication. The threat actor can then be isolated to only the module they were able to breach, while keeping the rest of the application secure and functional.

## Defense-in-Depth and Security

Have you ever wondered why all airplanes [still have ashtrays](https://oreil.ly/VpXY3) even though smoking has been banned in all commercial flights for decades? In the briefing before takeoff, you are reminded that tampering with the smoke detector in the lavatory is a criminal offense. There is also a sign in there reminding you of this law, but right below that sign, you’ll find an ashtray. In 2009, a [flight was grounded](https://oreil.ly/cDU4s) for not having an ashtray.

The Federal Aviation Authority (FAA) explains that even though smoking is banned, some people still manage to sneak in cigarettes and smoke on flights. After smoking, passengers may throw cigarette butts in trash receptacles, which may be a fire hazard. Security-wise, this is a threat that increases the risk of an aircraft catching fire. Having an ashtray ensures that if people do somehow manage to bring cigarettes on the flight, they have a place to stub them safely. Ashtrays are the controls that reduce the risk of fire.

You might be wondering, seeing how dangerous smoking is on a flight, why aren’t greater security controls added at airports to ensure that passengers cannot bring cigarettes on board planes? Why require a costly installation of redundant ashtrays in every flight, all around the world?

The answer is in a security concept called _defense-in-depth_. In secure systems, multilayered, at times redundant, or even obsolete controls have been shown to be more effective than a single point-based solution. Having multiple controls dispersed at different layers rather than one perfectly reliable control is shown to result in a lower risk for the application. In designing each control, you assume that an upstream control failed at stopping an intruder. This ensures that there is no single point of failure. In the case of airlines, you assume that the airport security failed at catching the cigarettes, and hence the ashtray is used to further reduce the risk of fire.

In secure systems, you are often required to independently assess the efficacy of each of your controls. Many times, the presence of multiple controls may seem redundant, but with defense-in-depth, you can justify their presence and use. Throughout this book, I will recommend the introduction of multiple controls. As an example, in [Chapter 5](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch05.html#networking_security) I will recommend controls that work at the network layer, whereas in [Chapter 7](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch07.html#security_in_transit), I will discuss encryption in transit that primarily operates at the transport layer.

###### Note

If you look around, you can see examples of defense-in-depth everywhere, in many different aspects of life. Buildings with sprinklers still have fire extinguishers. Buildings with strong security at the entrances still have locks on the doors of individual office spaces. Overlapping security controls are what protect us from the failure of individual controls, and embracing such a reality is what helps in the evolution of a secure-thinking strategy.

## Security Through Perimeter Protection

I start this section by admitting that I am a cynic of this approach. In this approach, organizations create a strong firewall against any requests that come from the public internet. This firewall is known as a _perimeter_ , which is secured to protect your application against external threats. Remote employees are then provided with virtual private network (VPN) solutions to have a similar experience as their in-person counterparts. In the context of security, _trust_ refers to accessing systems with little or no verification of who someone is or why they need this access. In this architecture, users or services within a _trust boundary_ (generally within the organization’s data center or VPN) are trusted, and hence do not go through an additional layer of authentication. Here, the belief is that most attackers are external to the organization, and trusted users are assumed to have only the best intentions. Hence, controls in this architecture are directed mainly toward external threats. Many security professionals say that such an architecture tries to _defend the castle_ against external attacks. Many regulators still require the presence of such a perimeter protection and hence, if you work in a heavily regulated industry, you may not have a choice around perimeter protection.

## Security Through Zero Trust Architecture

In recent years, it has become apparent that both external _and_ internal attackers pose serious threats to organizations. The notion that robustly securing the perimeter is enough to achieve security is outdated. A _zero trust architecture_ is therefore employed in many modern organizations. A zero trust architecture assumes that threats to your application are omnipresent (internal and external to the organization). Thus, you cannot trust internal services and must implement controls, assuming there are malicious actors working well within your trust boundaries. In other words, this model assumes that the attackers are already inside your castle walls and, instead of protecting your castle, you must think of individually protecting all your resources. Many recent high-profile incidents have indeed been caused by trusted insiders or malicious actors posing as insiders, as seen in the 2019 Capital One breach. Hence, a zero trust architecture is preferred.

[Chapter 8](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch08.html#security_design_for_organizational_comp) will introduce you to some of the tools that AWS offers, which will help you implement zero trust architecture in your organization while reducing friction with your development team.

###### Note

I’m not the only one in favor of a zero trust architecture. On May 12, 2021, US president Joe Biden signed an [executive order](https://oreil.ly/Oojeg) that aims at improving the US information security architecture. As part of this order, the federal government has been tasked, among other things, to “develop a plan to implement zero trust architecture.”

# A Brief Introduction to Software Architecture

Although you may already be aware of the basics of microservices and their advantages, I want to spend a little time providing a refresher on the basics of microservice design. Application architecture usually takes a systems approach toward software design. The majority of enterprise software consists of smaller parts that are put together to create the desired system.

## Tier-Based Architecture

Consider a typical ecommerce website application. Assume this application supports four end-user actions:

  * A user can buy an item.

  * A user can return an item.

  * A user can check their balance.

  * A user can check the available supply of inventory.

The goal of a _tiered_ (layered) architecture is to have presentation (user interface), application management, and data management functions separated from one another. This style of architecture has been the de facto standard for most applications, primarily because of its simplicity, familiarity, and low cost. [Figure 1-1](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#in_a_layered_approachcomma_the_applicat) shows a typical tiered application.

The layered architecture style, while having many advantages, also has some distinct disadvantages. One of these is the lack of agility and scalability, which has led to the discovery of other architectural styles. Authors Neal Ford and Mark Richards, in their book [_Fundamentals of Software Architecture_ (O’Reilly)](https://oreil.ly/Mthy0), discuss in detail all the pitfalls of such a design.

###### Figure 1-1. In a layered approach, the application logic can be divided into different layers, depending on the tier the application runs in.

## Domain-Driven Design

A contrast to the traditional tier-based approach is _domain-driven design_ (DDD). In DDD, it is assumed that every software program relates to some activity or interest of its user or the business function. An architect can divide the application in a way that aligns with its business and functional units by associating application logic to its functional domain (and at times, more granularly into subdomains).

For example, if you were to group the services from [Figure 1-1](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#in_a_layered_approachcomma_the_applicat) based on their domains (and subdomains), you would see three functional domains that exist:

Inventory or product domain
    This domain deals with all services related to managing products. It includes keeping track of the inventory of products, prices, and descriptions.
Customer domain
    This domain is responsible for accepting customer’s requests, such as checking out of the application or returning any items.
Finance domain
    This is responsible for charging the customer and keeping track of balances and all other money movement.

If you are to partition the services from [Figure 1-1](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#in_a_layered_approachcomma_the_applicat) into functional domains, it might look something like [Figure 1-2](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#the_same_application_from_figure_one-on).

###### Figure 1-2. The same application from [Figure 1-1](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#in_a_layered_approachcomma_the_applicat), with the same modular components, can be segregated in a different way using DDD. DDD preserves the business domains while dividing applications.

In a domain-driven approach, services that satisfy a common business domain are more likely to have a strong relationship with one another and, therefore, make sense to be grouped together. Additionally, DDD makes it easier to manage larger business projects by aligning the software architecture with the business requirements more closely. Such groups are generally called _bounded contexts_ where services within a bounded context share a close relationship with one another, while any interaction with any external entity can be thought of as a formally defined contract. Conversely, all services within bounded contexts should only have loose relationships with any service that is outside their bounded contexts.

Within a bounded context, applications are designed for interoperability. They speak the same proverbial language. In an ideal world, a bounded context and a subdomain should have the same constituent services. In practice, however, especially when legacy software systems are involved, there may be some differences.

# Microservices

So what makes any architecture a _microservice architecture_? Unlike a monolithic application, a _microservice-based application_ is made up of a large number of lightweight services, which are:

Independently deployed
    You can upgrade, patch, or remove individual services without affecting the rest of the application.
Independently scalable
    You can scale up or down individual services if there is additional load on individual parts of the application without affecting the rest of the application.
Loosely coupled
    Degradation or changes to individual services should not affect the rest of the application.
Domain-driven
    Services are modularized and grouped into contexts according to the business domains they belong to.
Responsible for one single business task
    Microservices are supposed to follow the single-responsibility principle (SRP).

A key step in defining a microservice architecture is figuring out how big an individual microservice has to be. What differentiates a microservice from a regular application, though, is that a microservice is required to follow the SRP.

The SRP proposes that every microservice encapsulates a single part of an application’s functionality. This ensures that each microservice is lean, lightweight, deployment agnostic, and simple to understand.

If you search for online literature on microservices, you often find them [generally compared](https://oreil.ly/49YGT) to LEGO® bricks. A microservice architect views any large application as consisting of several microservices that are patched together, similar to a LEGO construction. Within these applications, individual microservices are expected to follow the SRP. These individual services are also supposed to be autonomous and should have limited or no dependence on other services.

###### Tip

Throughout the book, I will be referencing the SRP quite frequently. It is the single most important principle to remember while designing microservice architectures.

In [“Cloud Architecture and Security”](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#cloud_architecture_and_security), I promised you that cloud microservice architectures will help in realizing the secure design patterns I mentioned in the section. With the help of the formal definition of microservices, I am sure you can see why:

Security through modularity
    Since by definition microservice applications are made up of small modular services, it is possible to easily implement security controls.
Security through simplicity
    Since each modular microservice is small and follows the SRP, it is much easier to achieve the goal of simplicity in a microservice architecture.
Security through isolation
    Since microservices follow DDD, it is easier to create an isolated environment to run individual microservices.
Security through zero trust architecture
    By better using the AWS SRM, and by using the granular controls that microservice architectures afford, it is possible to easily implement a zero trust architecture.

To sum up, microservices are atomic and discrete business functions, each with one function. Microservice developers should be free to choose the tool that provides them with the best return while designing their specific microservice to perform the single task that it is supposed to perform. As an architect who is responsible for integrating these individual microservices into a bigger, cohesive application, the most important thing you should care about is the business function of the microservice. Everything else is background noise and should not drive policy decisions.

# Implementation of Microservices on AWS

There is no rule regarding how a microservice should be actually implemented. Nevertheless, it is important to modularize the application and loosely couple these modules so that these services can be swapped out, upgraded, replaced, or scaled on their own.

Over the last few years, due to various reasons, there has been a consolidation in the industry where many organizations have decided to adopt one of two ways:

Container-based approach
    In this approach, the microservices are encapsulated into lightweight, autonomous containers (such as [Docker containers](https://oreil.ly/0bEb4)), which are shipped to run on top of a container engine such as [Docker engine](https://oreil.ly/YhriQ). As long as there is a Docker engine that can run these containers, developers can use whichever tool, language, or runtime they want to write these services in. Each physical server (called a _node_) runs the Docker engine, and multiple containers can be deployed on them.
FaaS-based approach
    In this approach, the business function is run directly on a Function as a Service (FaaS) platform. Instead of packaging your application in a container, you write your business function in a standardized way so it can run directly on a cloud platform, which hands over the responsibility of running it securely to the cloud provider.

Both options have advantages and limitations from a security and scalability perspective. There is a lot of online literature on both approaches and their trade-offs. (One great article I read on container-based microservices was in a [blog from Severless](https://oreil.ly/Z4UdQ).) Throughout this book, I will focus on ways to increase security around both of these approaches by leveraging the tools that AWS provides us with.

## Container-Based Microservice Architecture

Going back to the SRP, since everything else outside the business function of the microservice is background noise, wouldn’t it be great if we could package the business function and all its dependencies into a dedicated, sandboxed virtual environment and deploy it everywhere? This is the container approach to microservices.

In this approach, all the business logic, along with any dependencies, is packaged into a lightweight, portable, deployable _container_. This container contains the business function that the microservice is supposed to perform, along with the exact instructions that are needed to run this application code anywhere, on any environment that supports running such a container. The same container (along with its application logic) is tested across different development environments and deployed to your application environment. This container can be scaled up, upgraded, or swapped out depending on the needs of the application. Docker has proven to be a popular container technology in the industry, so for the purpose of this book, I will be using Docker for my examples.

Your entire application is now a mesh of such containers providing the business functionality that is needed to run the application. When implementing a container-based approach, the architect typically creates a document (called a _spec_), which specifies which containers should run in production, creating the blueprint of your entire application. As long as all the services defined in the spec are available, the application is deemed to be healthy.

[Figure 1-3](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#docker_containers_can_be_shipped_and_de) shows such an application where containerized microservices are deployed to provide a unified product offering.

###### Figure 1-3. Docker containers can be shipped and deployed to compose and create a unified product offering made entirely of modularized and containerized microservices.

From a security perspective, you rely on Docker to isolate and containerize the business logic. Multiple containers may run on the same physical server, and therefore you rely heavily on the Docker engine’s ability to isolate each container from interfering with code running on another container. Any vulnerability that enables services from one container to interfere with the host operating system or another container is called a _breakout vulnerability_. So, in technical terms, you rely on Docker to assume the responsibility of preventing breakouts. This means it is critical to ensure that you run the latest versions of both the Docker container as well as the engine that runs these containers.

These containers are typically stored in a container _registry_ , a specialized storage system for Docker containers. On AWS, these containers can then be securely stored inside Amazon Elastic Container Registry (ECR).

###### Tip

For a detailed overview of Docker, I recommend the book [_Docker: Up and Running_](https://oreil.ly/YlTUV) by Sean Kane and Karl Matthias (O’Reilly).

## A Very Brief Introduction to Kubernetes

Although each Docker container is a _unit-of-deployment_ , in most production environments, you want to bind them together to work as a cohesive unit. Container orchestrators such as [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/) are what enable you to run multiple Docker container-based microservices. You can instruct a Kubernetes cluster to run a certain number of instances of each of the Docker containers, and Kubernetes can run them for you.

Setting up a Kubernetes cluster is the sole topic of many other books and hence I will not go into the details. But I will give you the gist of what a Kubernetes cluster does for you. If you’re more interested in the setup process, I recommend _Kubernetes in Action_ by Marko Luksa (Manning Publications). The [official documentation](https://oreil.ly/sccOl) for Kubernetes also has some great material that can help you run your clusters. Kubernetes, as you may know, is an orchestrator that you can use to run any number of services at any time. If you provide Kubernetes with a spec of the number of instances of each service you want to keep running, it will spin up new containers based on the configuration you define in the spec.

The most basic microservice unit in a Kubernetes cluster is called a _pod_. A pod is a group of one or more containers, with shared storage and network resources. A _node_ is a worker machine in Kubernetes and may be either a virtual or a physical machine. Kubernetes runs your microservices by placing containers into pods to run on nodes. As you can imagine, you can scale individual microservices by adding new pods to your cluster. Pods virtualize the runtime of your microservice. Pods run on underlying hardware that can be scaled by adding new nodes to the cluster. The part of the Kubernetes cluster that administers and facilitates the orchestration of the pods is called the _control plane_. [Figure 1-4](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#a_concise_high-level_overview_of_a_typi) illustrates this setup.

###### Figure 1-4. A concise high-level overview of a typical Kubernetes setup.

To sum up, in a Kubernetes setup, the main goal is to run the application logic, which is then containerized and stored in a container registry. Based on the specifications you provide to this cluster, containers execute this business logic on the nodes. Malicious actors could target either the control plane, the container storage, or the application runtime environment (nodes) in order to cause unwanted issues in the application.

###### Tip

I think of the specification as the _recipe_ that I provide to my Kubernetes cluster. Based on this recipe, Kubernetes makes a list of all the services (containers) that it needs to run, fetches all the containers from the container registry, and runs these services on my nodes for me. Thus, it spins up an entire microservice application based simply on my spec. You can configure where these microservices, which are specified in your spec, run by configuring the nodes in your cluster.

AWS provides you with two managed options to run your Kubernetes cluster:

  * AWS Elastic Kubernetes Service (Amazon EKS)

  * AWS Elastic Kubernetes Service, Fargate Mode (Amazon EKS Fargate)

Since AWS assumes the responsibility of running, scaling, and deploying your functions onto AWS Lambda, you do not need a separate orchestrator.

So how do you decide how to run your microservices? Because security is the concern, I have created a handy flowchart that you can follow to make such a decision, shown in [Figure 1-5](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#a_flowchart_to_help_architects_decide_h).

###### Figure 1-5. A flowchart to help architects decide how to run their microservices.

The next section goes into the details of these implementation methods.

###### Note

AWS Elastic Container Service (AWS ECS) is also an option if you want to orchestrate containers on AWS. Although ECS differs slightly from EKS in its offering, there is a fairly large overlap between EKS and ECS from a security point of view. Hence, to avoid repetition, I will focus my attention on Amazon EKS and AWS Lambda. If you’re interested in an in-depth overview of ECS, apart from the AWS [documentation](https://oreil.ly/DMliv), _Docker on Amazon Web Services_ by Justin Menga (Packt Publishing) goes into the details.

## Function as a Service: FaaS Using AWS Lambda

FaaS is a different way of approaching microservices. AWS realized that the business logic is the core feature of any microservice. As a consequence, AWS provides an environment where users can run this logic without having to use containerization or packaging. Simply plug your business function, written in a supported programming language, into the cloud environment to run directly. AWS Lambda provides this runtime capability. [Figure 1-6](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#functions_providing_business_logic_can) shows a microservice application where AWS Lambdas are deployed to provide a unified product offering.

###### Figure 1-6. Functions providing business logic can be deployed to AWS Lambda to run together to provide a unified product offering.

The great part of AWS Lambda is that AWS assumes the responsibility of running the function, thus taking away some of the security responsibilities from you as part of the SRM. In this setup, you do not have to worry about container security, running nodes, or securing any of the orchestration setup.

# Overview of Cloud Microservice Implementation

From a security perspective, there are many places where security professionals can anticipate security incidents in a microservice environment. A typical microservice is illustrated in [Figure 1-7](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#layered_representation_of_a_microservic). This section briefly covers what each of these layers means and how an attacker could exploit your application at each of these layers to gain unauthorized control:

Business logic
    

Also, sometimes called _function_ or _application_ logic, this is the application code that runs the core business function that your microservice aims to address. This code is very specific to the domain and should stick to the SRP. It may also be written in the user’s choice of programming language. Since this code is domain specific, it is possible for malicious actors to hijack this code to perform unauthorized activities.

Runtime environment (container environment)
    

The container environment should contain the language runtime environment that is required to run the application logic from component 1. This is the environment where the application logic runs in a sandboxed environment, thus isolating the runtime and containing the blast radius of the microservice (up to an extent). However, as with any application runtime, keeping the container version current and patching older vulnerabilities in the containers and their runtime is important to ensure securing your application.

Container runtime (container engine)
    

This is the software that is capable of running containers from component two. Since microservices running in containers run in an isolated, sandboxed environment, it is important to make sure that security vulnerabilities in the virtualization layer of container runtime do not affect the host operating system or other containers running on the same machine. This isolation is the responsibility of the container runtime. Such [breakout vulnerabilities](https://oreil.ly/Oom5c) may be identified from time to time and patched immediately by Docker. So it is important to continuously update the container runtime to ensure that you are running the latest Docker engine.

Virtual machine
    

This is the virtual machine (VM) where you will be running the container engine. Each VM may contain multiple containers running containers; you can host multiple microservices on each VM. Since a VM is similar to any other operating system, attackers may be able to exploit OS-level vulnerabilities, especially with VMs not running the latest version of the operating system.

Physical hardware
    

This is the most basic layer within the microservice infrastructure and refers to the physical hardware that may be providing the computational power necessary to run the microservices. Like any other physical item, these servers may be vulnerable to theft, vandalism, or [hacking using flash drives](https://oreil.ly/8mPU0) or other physical devices.

Container storage
    

It is common to store prebuilt containers as part of the development process in dedicated storage systems. If prebuilt containers are not stored securely, an attacker may be able to tamper with built images by injecting malicious code into them or swapping out images and replacing them with malicious code.

Container orchestration
    

An _orchestrator_ makes decisions on how many instances of a particular service need to be kept running to achieve application health. Orchestration allows you to build application services that span multiple containers, schedule containers across a cluster, scale those containers, and manage their health over time. An orchestrator is responsible for making sure that services are kept running or restarted whenever they go down. It can also make decisions regarding scaling up or scaling down services to match traffic.

###### Figure 1-7. Layered representation of a microservice running in a cloud environment.

The next sections go over the various microservice runtime options and, from a security perspective, discuss your responsibilities as opposed to the responsibilities assumed by AWS. I start off with the option that assigns you with the most amount of responsibility within the three choices and then end with the option where AWS assumes most of the responsibility.

## Amazon EKS

Control planes play a crucial role in a Kubernetes setup, since they constantly control application availability by ensuring that the runtime services act according to the spec. Given its importance, AWS provides users with a fully managed control plane in the form of Amazon EKS. Amazon EKS is a managed service that allows you to set up the Kubernetes control plane on AWS. By doing so, AWS assumes the responsibility of the infrastructure that runs the control plane that runs your cluster as part of the SRM. Having said that, you are still responsible for configuring and securing the settings that make this control plane secure.

[Figure 1-8](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#amazon_eks_is_a_fully_managed_kubernete) illustrates the setup using Amazon EKS. AWS ensures that the risk of a malicious actor taking over your control plane is mitigated as part of the SRM. However, in Amazon EKS you are still responsible for running the nodes, so the risk of a malicious actor taking over your nodes still remains.

###### Figure 1-8. Amazon EKS is a fully managed Kubernetes control plane that can orchestrate the microservices you run on servers you have to manage.

[Figure 1-9](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#container_orchestrationcomma_container) shows the split in responsibilities and how EKS leverages the AWS SRM to relieve you of some of the security responsibilities of running containers by comparing it with the model described in [Figure 1-7](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#layered_representation_of_a_microservic).

###### Figure 1-9. Container orchestration, container storage, and the security of the physical hardware can be assumed by AWS in this model.

## Amazon EKS Fargate Mode

A shortcoming of the regular EKS mode, as described in the previous section, is that you have to bear the responsibility of running the nodes. For many administrators, this adds an extra set of responsibility that is, at times, unnecessary. If the only aspect of microservice architecture you care about is the single business function it provides, you may want to delegate the responsibility of running nodes to AWS.

This is where the Fargate mode comes into the picture. In Fargate mode, you can create the Docker containers you want to run in production, configure EKS to create a cluster of these containers, and then hand over these containers to AWS to run on their servers. In this way, AWS takes care of securing the servers, the operating systems on them (keeping the OS up to date), and maintaining network and physical security of the hardware that supports these servers—while you focus on the microservices themselves instead of the backend infrastructure.

[Figure 1-10](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#in_aws_fargate_modecomma_aws_assumes_th) shows the same architecture described in [Figure 1-8](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#amazon_eks_is_a_fully_managed_kubernete), where it was running on the regular EKS mode. But this time, it runs in the Fargate mode.

###### Figure 1-10. In AWS Fargate mode, AWS assumes the responsibility of running the nodes, thus reducing your responsibility.

You can see how the responsibility for the nodes that ran the Docker engine is now assumed by AWS in the cloud, thus reducing your security responsibility. You are, however, still responsible for the containers themselves as well as the business logic that runs on these containers. You can also redraw the application runtime stack, as shown in [Figure 1-11](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#the_security_of_container_orchestration). As mentioned, the Docker engine is run on the nodes; hence its responsibility is assumed by AWS. You are only responsible for using the right Docker container and the business logic that runs on it.

###### Figure 1-11. The security of container orchestration, container storage, physical hardware, virtual machine, and the container runtime can be assumed by AWS in this model.

## Function as a Service Using AWS Lambda

FaaS-based service is the final type of microservice that helps developers hit the ground running by assuming the responsibility for all types of security around running the service; therefore, developers can focus on the business logic instead of anything else. On AWS, AWS Lambda enables developers to run their function in a FaaS environment.

On AWS Lambda, the responsibility of implementing a majority of controls is assumed by AWS. However, you are still required to configure access and set up networking controls and other configurations to ensure that AWS can enable security on your behalf. AWS bears the responsibility of provisioning a server and running your code in a sandboxed environment, as long as it is written to the AWS Lambda [specifications](https://oreil.ly/ct7qf). AWS Lambdas are a powerful, scalable, and most importantly, secure way of running microservices on AWS.

The runtime architecture stack of microservices running on AWS Lambda can be seen in [Figure 1-12](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#the_responsibility_of_everything_except). As mentioned, the customer is only responsible for the business logic while everything else is managed by AWS. In a Lambda-based architecture, you do not have to worry about patching the operating system, Docker versions, or anything related to the infrastructure.

###### Figure 1-12. The responsibility of everything except the business logic and its configuration is assumed by AWS.

###### Note

At the time of writing this book, AWS also allows you to run Docker containers on AWS Lambda. However, for the purposes of this book, I am restricting the scope only to running functions (FaaS).

## Microservice Implementation Summary

[Figure 1-13](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#aws_provides_different_ways_to_run_the) illustrates how your security responsibilities change depending on your choice of microservice implementation.

###### Figure 1-13. AWS provides different ways to run the same function. Depending on your choice, you can trade off cost, flexibility, and configurability for security responsibility.

As an architect, you should decide how much responsibility you want to take upon yourself, in return for the flexibility you gain from running the application on your own terms.

# Examples of Microservice Communication Patterns

Let’s go back to the LEGO analogy of microservices. What can you do with a single LEGO brick? Perhaps not much. How about 10 of them? Now you can make a few different shapes. A hundred LEGO bricks give you lots of possibilities. Most large applications will be created by composing hundreds of smaller microservices, all working with one another and, more importantly, communicating with one another. Since communication links are the weakest links in any application, this interservice communication adds to the aggregate risk of the application. You have to secure new channels of external communication instead of the familiar in-memory calls, as may happen with monoliths. As a result, much of this book is dedicated to securing interservice communication. To illustrate how security concepts will be applied throughout this book, I would like to briefly discuss some of the many patterns that architects use in microservice communication. These examples do not constitute an exhaustive list, and many other communication patterns are followed in the industry. The [Microservices.io](https://oreil.ly/uSPHX) blog or the Microsoft [architecture ebook](https://oreil.ly/9TEKt) are great resources if you’re interested in other microservice communication patterns.

## Example 1: Simple Message Passing Between Contexts

The simplest way of communicating between contexts is by directly sending messages to each other (generally through HTTP requests). In this example, whenever a customer checks out an item, the checkout service will send out two messages. The first would be to the products domain, informing it to reduce the stock of inventory to reflect this purchase. The second would be to the finance service, informing it to charge the customer’s credit card on file.

[Figure 1-14](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#there_are_many_ways_in_which_these_mess) shows an example of direct communication.

###### Figure 1-14. There are many ways in which these messages can be passed.

The traditional way of passing messages is by using synchronous REST endpoints. Even though it does not fit my definition of microservice-based communication, companies all over the world use it. Whenever a purchase is made, the checkout service will call a POST endpoint on the collect cash service and consequently call a POST endpoint on the inventory domain. However, synchronous communication using REST will mean the checkout service will wait for the two synchronous operations to complete before it can complete its job. This adds a strong dependency and increases coupling between the finance, inventory, and customer domains.

In such situations, the job of the security professionals is to secure the REST endpoints and the HTTP infrastructure in the application. [Chapter 7](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch07.html#security_in_transit) talks about the fundamentals of setting up security in transit.

###### Warning

It is my opinion that synchronous communication in this way goes against the very essence of microservices, since the resulting microservices are no longer independent and will continue to maintain a strong relationship. Although some microservice architectures still use synchronous REST communication, most architectural models for microservices dissuade microservice services from using [synchronous communication](https://oreil.ly/JTa0v).

## Example 2: Message Queues

Message brokers or queuing systems are commonly used for cross-domain communication in microservices. A service that wants to send a message will put it on a persistent medium. In contrast, the recipient of the message will read from the persistent medium. Communication through message queues occurs asynchronously, which means the endpoints publishing and consuming messages interact with the queue, rather than each other. Producers can add messages to the queue once they are ready, and consumers can handle messages only if they have enough capacity. No producer in the system is ever stalled waiting for a downstream consumer or affected by its reliability. [Figure 1-15](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#using_message_queues_for_communication) illustrates a queue-based communication.

###### Figure 1-15. Using message queues for communication between microservices

You can see how the role of a security professional increases slightly in this example. Since queues use a persistence layer, security professionals must secure both the queues and the endpoints that service A and service B use to connect to the queue.

## Example 3: Event-Based Microservices

The event-based communication paradigm is another popular way of designing microservice communication. An event-based system works on the premise that every state-changing command results in an event that is then broadcast (generally using an entity known as an _event broker_) to other parts of the application. Other services within other contexts subscribe to these events. When they receive an event, they can update their own state to reflect this change, which could lead to the publication of more events. [Figure 1-16](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/security-and-microservice/9781098101459/ch01.html#event-based_microservices_offer_a_chore) illustrates a sample event-based microservice application. To learn more, check out [_Building Event-Driven Microservices_](https://oreil.ly/gFZzV) by Adam Bellemare (O’Reilly), an entire book dedicated to such an architecture.

###### Figure 1-16. Event-based microservices offer a choreographed approach to microservices.

In this example, security professionals must secure the event broker, along with all the necessary infrastructure needed for storing, broadcasting, and hosting the events.

# Summary

This chapter introduced the basic concepts of threats and risk, and then explained the concept of control and countermeasures. In a cloud environment, the responsibility of implementing controls is shared between the customer and AWS. Understanding where this split lies is the main idea behind cloud security. Even if AWS assumes the responsibility for certain controls, it may still be the customer’s responsibility to configure the controls in such a way that AWS can protect against potential attacks. The chapter also introduced some of the common microservice architecture patterns and their implementation on AWS. The next chapter goes deep into authentication and authorization, two of the most basic controls available that reduce the risk of your application from potential threats.