# Chapter 12. AWS Messaging, Orchestration, Monitoring, and Access Management Services

In systems running at a large scale, multiple components interact and coordinate with one another to perform tasks, which is called orchestration . This communication and coordination among application components can be managed by different AWS services, and we can pick and choose our services based on our use case. In this chapter, we’ll deep dive into core orchestration services like Amazon Simple Notification Service (SNS), which can be used to broadcast messages to multiple subscribers, and AWS Step Functions, which can be used to coordinate and execute different AWS or custom services in a specific order.

We’ll begin with a discussion of AWS services that help us achieve the pub/sub design pattern in the AWS cloud environment, such as Amazon Managed Streaming for Apache Kafka (MSK), Amazon Kinesis, Amazon Simple Queue Service (SQS), and Amazon SNS. Then, we’ll move on to monitoring, authorization, and authentication services, such as Amazon CloudWatch, AWS IAM, and Amazon Cognito.

# Amazon Managed Streaming for Apache Kafka

We discussed pub/sub architecture, message brokers, and message queues in Chapter 8 ; this chapter introduces several services that AWS offers for designing applications on top of these concepts. Apache Kafka is an open source message broker and event-streaming platform used extensively for designing event-driven architectures. AWS offers a managed service for Apache Kafka, Amazon MSK, to reduce the operational burden. MSK exposes to customers control-plane operations, such as creating, updating, and deleting clusters, and data-plane operations, such as producing and consuming events.

When setting up the MSK cluster , you specify the number and type of broker nodes along with the storage capacity in each AZ. A minimum of two AZs must be selected to ensure high cluster availability. MSK automatically detects broker failures and replaces the node with a healthy node with the same IP address. Like many other services in the AWS environment, MSK is offered in two capacity modes: serverless and provisioned. You can choose the serverless option to let AWS worry about infrastructure configuration; the provisioned option allows you to select nodes and storage configurations. Coordination and synchronization among the broker nodes is managed via ZooKeeper nodes, and MSK creates these nodes for us. MSK also supports KRaft mode in recent version 3.7.x ; KRaft can handle the ZooKeeper functionality.

The next set of configurations in setting up the MSK cluster are related to networking, security, and monitoring. You should select AZs and subnets in which brokers should be launched and then define security measures. First, let’s discuss how clients can access the MSK cluster:

Unauthenticated access

As the name suggests, you can allow clients to directly access your cluster without any authentication, though this is not a recommended way to configure access control.

IAM role-based access  

The access to the MSK cluster is managed by IAM roles and associated IAM policies.

SASL/SCRAM authentication 

SASL/SCRAM stands for Simple Authentication and Security Layer/Salted Challenge Response Authentication Mechanism. You essentially use sign-in credentials (username and password) for clients and store them to AWS Secrets Manager , associated with a secret resource. This provides a secure method of cluster access, while Secrets Manager takes full responsibility for auditing, updating, and rotating credentials. You can share the same credentials across the clusters as necessary.

TLS authentication

You can use TLS authentication for client access and store these certificates in AWS Certificate Manager (ACM) .

For data security, you can encrypt your data both at rest and in transit. Encryption at rest can be enabled by an AWS-managed or a customer-managed key. For in-transit encryption, you can use TLS encryption for communications within the cluster and use plain-text or TLS encryption or both for communication between the broker and clients.

There can be multiple forms of live-streaming data requiring near real-time analysis. MSK is used for the data ingestion from the sources and then feeds this data to other sources, such as Kinesis Data Firehose , AWS Lambda, or Apache Flink , for analysis. Let’s discuss the Amazon Kinesis offerings next.

# Amazon Kinesis

Amazon Kinesis can serve multiple use cases revolving around streaming, analytics, and ETL. Four subservices are available under the Kinesis umbrella: Kinesis Data Streams (KDS), Kinesis Data Firehose (KDF), Kinesis Data Analytics (KDA), and Kinesis Video Streams (KVS). Let’s start with KDS.

## Amazon Kinesis Data Streams

To extend the example of capturing real-time user interactions, you have multiple devices operated by users referred to as the source . This interaction stream is then ingested and stored by KDS. As the stream is now available in Kinesis, it can be processed based on requirements like Spark on EMR clusters. Finally, the results can be dumped to a destination like DynamoDB, or you can analyze the results with any analytical tool, as shown in Figure 12-1 . In short, data streaming on Kinesis enables us to ingest, process, and analyze huge volumes of data at a large scale without any management overhead on our plate.

[image: image]

###### Figure 12-1. Amazon Kinesis Data Streams

A shard is the base throughput unit in KDS and is a uniquely identified sequence of data records in a stream. A shard can ingest up to 1 MB per second, supporting up to 1,000 transactions per second (TPS), and it can emit up to 2 MB per second to consumers. Look at alternatives (such as Apache Kafka) if these limitations impact your business use case solution. You can configure a number of shards by looking at the supported TPS by a shard and your business use case production and consumption rate. This configuration is required for provisioned mode of KDS. You can also consider on-demand mode, where this overhead is handled by AWS itself and it automatically scales per requirements.

The producers publish data records to data streams, which consist of a sequence number, partition key, and data blob:

Sequence number 

Auto-assigned by KDS and is unique per partition key within its shard.

Partition key 

Groups data at the shard level, meaning which shard a data record belongs to. The key should be chosen such that it resolves to uniform data distribution across the available shards.

Data blob 

An immutable sequence of bytes that consists of the content or information, with a maximum allowed size of 1 MB.

Let’s discuss the key considerations for using KDS:

- To address the limitation of 2 MB/s fan-out at a shard level, KDS offers an additional feature: enhanced fan-out (EFO) . This can be used to have a dedicated pipe at each consumer level of shard so as to have 2 MB/s read throughput.
- KDS temporarily stores the data for a time period ranging from 24 hours to seven days; in the same time, it can be replayed for any retry strategies.
- AWS KMS can be used to encrypt sensitive data as it enters KDS.
- KDS provides multiple options on shards, such as update number of shards , split a shard , or merge shards into one . This helps ensure full capacity utilization of a shard. The update shard operation can internally merge the split shards to configure the updated number of shards config. Splitting or merging a shard can be useful if a shard is too “hot” or “cold,” meaning it is receiving too much or too little traffic. If the traffic is too high, it makes sense to split it to balance out the traffic; if the traffic is too low, it makes sense to merge the shards to optimize the number of shards.

Amazon MSK, which we discussed in the previous section, also provides streaming capabilities similar to KDS. Finalizing your choice of a particular technology depends on the business use case. No technology is inherently better than the other—every tool has its pros and cons. With this in mind, we’ll lay out how these two technologies differ from each other in Table 12-1 .

Table 12-1 should be helpful for devising some insights into which solution could be better for any future use cases. Now let’s move to another Kinesis offering, KDA, which is useful for analytics purposes in near real time as data is processed via KDS or MSK.

| Parameter | Amazon MSK | Amazon KDS |
|---|---|---|
| Business use cases | The feature gap narrowed between MSK and KDS over time, and the MSK ecosystem evolved to support direct integration with AWS services without the requirement of a connector. For example, MSK topics can be defined as event sources for Lambda , integration with S3 via KDF, stream consumption in Redshift , and OpenSearch . | Kinesis also offers direct integration with multiple AWS services. The deciding factor for MSK or KDS mostly depends on previous expertise. |
| Operations | The base logical entity is a partition, and you’re required to configure a number of brokers for the cluster launch. The serverless compute option doesn’t require customers to configure the number and type of brokers and is fully managed by AWS. | The base logical entity is a shard, and you’re required to specify the number of shards as per your workload. There is also an option for on-demand capacity, which doesn’t require customers to specify shard configuration and is managed by AWS. |
| Latency | Messages are available immediately after they are written to the topic. The latency can be at the lower end as compared to KDS. | It offers low latency: data to consumers is available to consume within 200 ms . With EFO, the latency is relatively lower than 200 ms. |
| Message ordering | Messages within a topic partition maintain an order. | Events within a single shard maintain an order. |
| Message delivery | MSK has support for exactly-once message delivery semantics, which could be helpful for streaming financial transactions with no requirement for explicit handling of duplication in the application code. | KDS offers at-least-once message delivery semantics. The application should have a duplicate handling mechanism in case the system doesn’t expect duplicate records. |
| Pricing | Cost is based on the number and type of broker instances per hour and the amount of storage allocated to the broker. For a serverless option, the cost is based on the hourly rate of clusters and each partition being created along with the storage required for write and read from the topics. | Customers are charged by the shard and the number of PUT operations to write data into the stream. There is no charge for reading data that is less than seven days old. For an on-demand option, the cost is per GB data written/read from data streams along with the number of streams. There is an additional charge for features like data retention for more than 24 hours and EFO. |
| Data retention | Data retention can be configured up to the amount of storage available on the brokers. When the requirement is to keep data for more than one year, MSK could be the preferred choice, but look into AWS archival storage solutions as well. | Data is accessible by default up to 24 hours, and that can be increased up to one year. |
| Migration overhead | MSK could be a great choice if you’re already managing the Kafka clusters on your own on Amazon EC2 instances or in an on-premises data center. This helps reduce any migration workload to a different setup for streaming. | Those with no familiarity with any of the services should look for other parameters to decide on a service to meet your business requirements. |

## Amazon Kinesis Data Analytics

Amazon KDA is a fully managed service for Apache Flink capabilities that puts no overhead on the customer’s plate and scales automatically for the desired throughput of incoming data. KDA can process, query, and analyze streaming data in near real time and send it to configured data destinations, such as KDS, MSK, S3, and OpenSearch.

Let’s first get a general understanding of Apache Flink before we discuss KDA. Apache Flink is an open source distributed processing engine framework for processing real-time data streams. It supports both bounded and unbounded stream processing. Bounded refers to batch processing; unbounded refers to processing streaming data in real time. Flink performs stateful computations in memory for low latency. The stateful nature ensures exactly-once processing of streaming data events. Flink ensures that the state is maintained even if the system goes down by asynchronous checkpointing the state to durable storage. It supports SQL and Table APIs , DataStream APIs , and stateful functions for easy access of data. SQL and Table APIs have the most abstraction, while DataStream APIs and stateful functions give more granular control and visibility to customers. It also has language support for Java, Scala, Python, and SQL.

Deployments and infrastructure management can be a huge pain point for customers and requires expertise in Flink’s core concepts. KDA is a serverless offering that allows customers to focus on business logic; AWS manages everything end to end. Here are some of the features specific to KDA:

- Because KDA is available in the AWS environment, it offers easy integration with other AWS services, such as Amazon KDS, Amazon MSK, Amazon S3, Amazon OpenSearch, Amazon CloudWatch, Amazon DynamoDB, Amazon KDF, and AWS Glue Schema Registry.
- KDA can be easily integrated with open source tools via Apache Flink connectors and offers support for building custom connectors for use cases that are not supported as of now.
- The integration with the AWS Glue data catalog helps you store and share metadata across multiple applications.
- KDA offers KDA Studio , which is a wrapper around Apache Flink SQL and Table APIs to analyze the streaming data in an interactive way via Apache Zeppelin serverless notebooks. KDA Studio supports the SQL, Scala, and Python languages.

###### Note

A notebook is a web-based developer interactive environment running in the browser of your choice. Developers can write queries or code in supported languages for different use cases, such as data transformation, visualization, and analysis.

KDA is primarily a fully managed version of Apache Flink, and since it is part of AWS’s cloud offerings, you can easily integrate it with other AWS services. Now, let’s discuss one more use case where we just have the requirement to load live streaming data to destinations. This requirement is met via Amazon KDF.

## Amazon Kinesis Data Firehose

Amazon KDF is a service for delivering live streaming data to different destinations, such as Amazon S3, Amazon OpenSearch, Amazon Redshift, Splunk , or any custom HTTP/HTTPS endpoints to easily integrate with third-party data storage providers. KDF is a fully managed service, so customers don’t have to worry about infrastructure and service maintenance. KDF doesn’t offer any storage of its own, so there isn’t the feature of replaying messages like in KDS. You can configure KDF to transform data before delivering it. Some built-in transformations are provided by KDF, such as conversion to Apache Parquet format. You can also add your custom transformations using AWS Lambda functions.

The following are some considerations for using KDF:

- The data record sent by the producer to the KDF delivery stream should not exceed 1,000 KB.
- To enhance security and reduce storage space at destination data storage solutions, you can batch, compress, and encrypt the data before loading.
- KDF buffers incoming streaming data to a certain size (buffer size) or certain period (buffer interval) before delivering it to data destinations. The buffer size could range from 1 to 128 MB for S3, from 1 to 100 MB for Amazon OpenSearch, and from 0.2 to 3 MB for AWS Lambda. The buffer interval for all these service integrations can range from 60 to 900 seconds.
- When Amazon Redshift is configured as a data destination, KDF first delivers data to the S3 bucket and then issues a COPY command to load data from the S3 bucket to the Redshift cluster.
- When you select S3 as a delivery destination, you can also enable dynamic partitioning of data. This helps on two fronts: it provides easy access to data in S3 for querying purposes, and it removes the need for partitioning at the source or after the data is stored. You can specify a specific key or an expression evaluated at runtime to identify keys to be used for partitioning.
- When it comes to data delivery to multiple destinations, KDF has a limitation. A single delivery stream can currently deliver data only to a single Amazon Redshift cluster or table, a single S3 bucket, and a single Amazon OpenSearch cluster or index. If there is a requirement to deliver to multiple destinations, a separate delivery stream should be created.
- KDF supports at-least-once data delivery semantics. There is a possibility that data is duplicated at the delivery destination due to retry mechanisms put in place for failure handling.

In short, Amazon KDF is a streaming ETL service fully managed by AWS for customers. Now let’s move to another Kinesis offering, the Amazon KVS service.

## Amazon Kinesis Video Streams

Amazon KVS is optimized to deliver live streaming video data to AWS in near real time from millions of sources for any processing, such as running ML algorithms or applying custom video processing. KVS can be used for offline batch analytics as well, and it supports other data streams, such as audio, images, and RADAR data.

KVS can be useful in a lot of scenarios , so let’s take an example of how it can help with building a household security system. When people are not home, it can be useful to get a real-time, continuous feed of what’s happening at their homes. To build this, a security company installs the cameras at the home in the desired locations. These cameras act as a source of information and have KVS Producer libraries installed to connect securely with KVS on the AWS cloud. The connection constantly streams the video feed to KVS where the data can optionally be stored or redirected to consumers. The consumers are applications that consume this data, such as a user accessing the feed on a mobile device, which can be helpful in cases like robbery or unannounced visitors. All of this can be achieved in real time.

Here are a few key considerations for using KVS:

- KVS provides durable data storage for configurable retention periods. It automatically encrypts the data at rest and in transit, creating an index over this data based on producer-generated or service-side timestamps for quick and easy access.
- KVS is a fully managed, serverless offering, so customers don’t have to worry about infrastructure management or expertise to tune configurations.
- KVS provides a parser library that helps consumer applications get data from video streams with very low latency. It can be used in Java applications for Matroska Video (MKV) streams.

Analyze your business requirements and choose the specific Amazon Kinesis offering that best suits your needs.

AWS also offers Amazon SNS and Amazon SQS, which can be used to create topics for publishing events, and these can be consumed by multiple consumers, such as SQS. In Chapter 11 , we discussed why customers might prefer Amazon EKS to Amazon ECS for launching their applications. A similar analogy applies here: Kafka is an open source message broker service that can be used in place of a combination of SNS and SQS. The reasons you might choose it are similar as well: you could be migrating your workloads to the AWS cloud or running existing workloads on the AWS cloud, or you just love open source software with its full visibility on development features. Let’s move our attention to SQS and SNS for management of topics and queues.

# Amazon Simple Queue Service

Chapter 1 introduced you to the concept of asynchronous communication, and Chapter 8 introduced message queues. Amazon SQS is a fully managed AWS queue service that automatically scales according to customer traffic requirements. It is a highly available service that doesn’t require any maintenance and deployment work from the customer’s end. Some key use cases where SQS stands out include:

Application decoupling 

Two microservices don’t interact with each other directly but rather communicate with SQS in between. This avoids any service dependency such that one service being down doesn’t affect the other.

Back pressure control 

The client consuming messages from SQS can consume messages at its own rate. The messages in SQS are kept for a maximum of 14 days or per customer configurations.

Let’s review the important concepts and key considerations related to Amazon SQS:

Visibility timeout

The message from the queue is not deleted after it is received by one consumer; instead, it is kept in SQS-owned temporary storage until a timeout setting, referred to as a visibility timeout . Once the consumer processes the message, it should tell SQS to delete the message within the visibility timeout. In scenarios set up for no communication until visibility timeout, the message is made available again for other consumers to consume. It can have values ranging from zero seconds to 12 hours.

Retention period

This is the amount of time the message is kept in the queue if it is not received by any consumers. It can have values ranging from one minute to 14 days.

Dead letter queue (DLQ)

There may be scenarios where a consumer failed to process a message but you might need the message for use cases like retrying after some time or for debugging purposes. This is where DLQ can help: the consumer can push failed messages to DLQ for any further action at a later time.

Maximum message size

The maximum allowed message size is 256 KB. This allowed size should be good enough for all standard use cases, but for scenarios with requirements for more than that, consider S3 or DynamoDB. The message can be stored as an S3 or DynamoDB object, which can be referenced in an SQS message.

Message delivery

Two consumers can’t compete for a single message at the same time; only a single thread can process a message at once. This ensures reliability since multiple producers can send messages and multiple consumers can receive messages.

SQS types

SQS offers two types of queues: standard and FIFO. Standard queues don’t guarantee message ordering, while FIFO does. Refer to Table 12-2 for a detailed comparison of the two.

SQS is widely used with SNS to meet message broker requirements without actually maintaining any infrastructure, such as a support use case of messaging fan-out . For a single message to be delivered to multiple recipients, it can be published to an SNS topic to which multiple SQSs are subscribed. The copy of the message is sent to each SQS, from which it can be independently processed by clients. Now, we’ll discuss what use cases SNS solves and how it differs from SQS.

| Comparison parameter | Standard queue | FIFO queue |
|---|---|---|
| Message ordering | Message ordering works on the best-effort basis. It is not guaranteed that messages are delivered in the same order that they are received by SQS. | Message ordering is guaranteed. |
| Throughput | Unlimited throughput; scales per customer needs. | The maximum allowed is 300 TPS. Requests can be batched in a batch of 10, so, essentially, you can achieve a maximum of 3,000 TPS. |
| Message delivery | Standard queue ensures at-least-once delivery. Messages might be delivered more than once to clients. The application logic should be idempotent to avoid unexpected behavior. | Messages are delivered exactly once. |
| Cost | Relatively cheaper than FIFO. | About 25% costlier than standard queues. |

# Amazon Simple Notification Service

Amazon SNS is an intermediary service that enables communication between producers and consumers. A producer publishes a message to an SNS topic, and then SNS forwards this message to all the subscriptions (aka consumers) via a push mechanism. The supported consumers are Amazon KDF streams, Amazon SQS, AWS Lambda, HTTP(S) endpoints, email, mobile push notifications, and mobile text messages.

To explain further, let’s return to our Cafe Delhi Heights restaurant example from previous chapters and think about the different offers and coupons we get on our phones. After your phone number is saved to the restaurant’s system and you agree to receive text messages, the restaurant sends messages if there are any new offers or discounts. Here, the restaurant is a message producer that publishes messages to discount channels, and we as subscribers get these messages.

We’ll compare the main differences between SQS and SNS in Table 12-3 .

| Comparison parameter | Amazon SQS | Amazon SNS |
|---|---|---|
| Message delivery mechanism | Application should poll messages from SQS. | SNS pushes messages to its subscribers. |
| Parallelism | Only a single consumer can access a message at any time, and it’s the consumer’s responsibility to delete messages from the queue once processed. | SNS pushes messages to all its consumers in parallel, and each consumer can process the message independently. |
| Message delivery latency | As it’s the application’s responsibility to poll messages from SQS, the delivery latency depends on the client polling mechanism. | There is no guaranteed latency SLA per documentation. Messages published to SNS topics are delivered to consumers instantaneously , with retry policies in case of delivery failures. |

It’s clear that SQS and SNS solve different use cases, and one service should not be seen as a replacement for the other service. Let’s explore SNS more now by looking into its important concepts and key considerations:

Message attributes

Message attributes are optional metadata items that can be sent along with the message body, represented by key, value, and type, with supported types being string, string array, binary, and number. These attributes can be used to take appropriate action on a message without processing the message body. Message attributes can optionally be used to filter messages at the subscriber level. For example, an SNS topic publishes weather-conditions messages for the entire continent of Asia, and it includes the country code in the message attributes. So if the application wants to process only the India-specific messages, it can directly filter out other messages without even reading them.

Message filtering

You saw one example of how message attributes can be helpful when filtering messages. This is achieved by assigning a filter policy to a topic subscription so that only the intended messages are delivered to subscribers. Filter policies can also be applied on the message body, though the message body should be a well-formed JSON object.

Message durability

The message received from the publisher is stored across multiple AZs before acknowledging success. This ensures message availability even during AZ downtimes.

Message delivery failure handling

There can be scenarios when a subscriber is not available to receive messages, so SNS has a retry policy based on the delivery protocol to overcome unavailability issues. In case the message is not delivered even after retries, a DLQ can be configured so that messages are pushed there and can be polled when the system comes back online.

Message security

To ensure data security or to handle sensitive data, you can enable server-side encryption on SNS topics by specifying an AWS KMS key. Once enabled, SNS encrypts the received message and stores it in encrypted form. The message is decrypted when it is being forwarded to topic subscribers. This encrypts only the message body, so avoid storing any sensitive information in topic and message metadata.

Message ordering

To cater to strict message ordering needs and prevent message duplication, SNS supports FIFO topics similar to SQS. You can use standard topics by default if there are no such requirements.

A combination of SQS, Lambda, and SNS is widely used to support event-driven asynchronous architecture (the pub/sub model) and orchestrate simple workflows. If you think about it, KDS offers a similar model where data is published to streams and multiple consumers can consume the data from a stream. The big difference is the near real-time processing offered by the KDS or MSK streaming solution. In the case of the SNS and SQS model, the data should be ingested first to any specific system for analysis, but KDS allows for data analysis as the data is received.

Moving on to use cases with requirements for orchestrating complex workflows in event-driven steps, let’s explore AWS’s workflow orchestration services.

# Workflow Orchestration

AWS offers two workflow orchestration services: AWS Step Functions and Amazon Managed Workflow for Apache Airflow (MWAA). Apache Airflow is more popular and recommended for batch workloads, while Step Functions is suitable for both live streaming and batch workloads (integrated with AWS Batch service ). Let’s take a simple example of ordering food online from our favorite restaurant—Cafe Delhi Heights. The sequence of steps to place an order after selecting a food item are (1) process the payment, (2) send food-order requests to the restaurant, (3) choose delivery partners, and (4) track delivery, as shown in Figure 12-2 .

[image: image]

###### Figure 12-2. Food-ordering workflow

Both of the offered services are fully managed by AWS, so customers can focus on building their applications without worrying about infrastructure maintenance. Increased application reliability is the main benefit of executing application logic in steps because it ensures independent execution (issues in one component don’t affect others) and proper failure handling. Step Functions is a proprietary service, while MWAA is built on top of open source Apache Airflow . Let’s explore both options in more detail.

## AWS Step Functions

AWS Step Functions is a fully managed, serverless, and visual workflow orchestration service that helps customers create and run state machines with ease to coordinate among the distributed application components. Here are some basic terms you need to know to fully understand AWS Step Functions:

State machine

A state machine represents the orchestration workflow as a sequence of steps, the relationships among them, and their input and output. These steps coordinate among themselves and interact with different components, such as an activity , Lambda function, SQS, DynamoDB, or any other service , to complete a specific operation.

Task

A task is a single state or step in a state machine. The task determines the action to be executed, such as calling Lambda to fetch an object from an S3 bucket and parse it. In short, a single state’s responsibility is to take input from the previous state, execute the specified work, and pass on the output to the next state.

Activity

A task is responsible for performing some work, which can be executed by workers on an EC2 machine, ECS, Lambda function, or any application with the ability to make HTTP connections hosted anywhere. This is enabled by a Step Functions feature called an activity. A Step Functions workflow step waits for activity workers to poll Step Functions for work via the GetActivityTask API, complete the work, and send an execution callback to Step Functions via the SendTaskSuccess or SendTaskFailure API. The timeout value to wait for callback can be configured in the task definition per the nature of application and your use case.

You can use Amazon States Language (ASL) or the Step Functions console to create your workflows. ASL is a JSON-based structured language to define workflow states declaratively, as shown in the following code snippet:

```
{
    “Comment”: “Amazon States language Example”,
    “StartAt”: “Hello World”,
    “States”: {
    “Hello World”: {
      “Type”: “Task”,
      “Resource”: “arn:aws:lambda:us-east-1:123456789012:function:HelloWorld”,
      “End”: true
    }
  }
}
```

AWS Step Functions always encrypts the data at rest using transparent server-side encryption, and all the data being passed from Step Functions to any integrated services is encrypted using TLS. This ensures protection of our sensitive data without any operational overhead. The action being taken by the state is determined by the type of state. The different state types you can choose from while designing your state machine are:

Pass

The Pass state doesn’t perform any work but just passes its input as its output. This state is mostly useful in state machine debugging and can also be used in transforming input so that transformed data is passed to the following state.

Task

As we discussed previously, the task essentially performs the work in a state machine. The Task state represents a single unit of work via a Lambda function, an activity, or the API actions of different AWS services.

Choice

The Choice state is similar to the if-else statement of any programming language. It is a conditional statement that evaluates to true or false to determine further actions to be taken in a state machine.

Wait

The Wait state takes a pause action during state machine workflow execution. The timeout value can be a relative value in seconds from the state start time or an absolute time as an exact timestamp.

Succeed

The Succeed state is a terminal state to stop workflow execution successfully.

Fail

The Fail state is the opposite of the Succeed state; it stops the workflow execution with failure. You can also explicitly catch the failure to take any specific action or just ignore the failure to move on to the following state.

Parallel

The Parallel state adds multiple branches in a state machine. This can help execute independent states in parallel to make workflow processing faster.

Map

The Map state runs a set of workflow steps in parallel for each item in the dataset as a JSON array or CSV file. Map state supports inline and distributed modes of operation, and you can select one of them per your requirements:

- Inline mode supports input as a JSON array from the previous step and can run up to 40 concurrent executions; the execution history should not exceed 25,000 entries.
- Distributed mode can support JSON or CSV files stored in Amazon S3 or a JSON array from the previous step. This mode offers high concurrency compared to inline mode and supports up to 10,000 parallel executions without any hard limit on execution history.

###### Note

The difference between Parallel and Map state is support for dynamic parallelism. In Parallel state, you define multiple branches to be executed in parallel, while Map state can create parallel child branches dynamically based on input.

You should always be prepared for service disruption and to overcome failure scenarios. In Step Functions, we recommend adding error handling, retry mechanisms , redrive mechanisms , and alerting mechanisms as applicable for better success of the state machine.

The business requirements vary from use case to use case, such as event-processing volume, system durability, workflow execution time, idempotency, and so on. To address these different requirements, Step Functions is offered in two types: standard and express workflows. A detailed comparison of these two types is provided in Table 12-4 .

| Comparison parameter | Standard workflows | Express workflows |
|---|---|---|
| Primary use case | Used for long-running workloads (up to one year) and durable and auditable workflows, such as ETL workloads. | Used for short-lived (up to five minutes), high-volume, event-processing workloads, such as streaming data processing. |
| Execution model | The workflow is executed exactly once unless explicit retry behavior is in place. | Support is available for both synchronous and asynchronous execution models. The execution is at least once for async and at most once for sync workflows. Sync workflows can be invoked from API Gateway or Lambda function or by using the StartSyncExecution API call. |
| Support for AWS Step Functions activities | Supported with a maximum of one thousand pollers allowed on the same activity Amazon Resource Name (ARN). | Not supported. |
| Execution history | Maximum of 25,000 entries in the execution event history. To avoid this, you can explore using the distributed-mode Map state or starting a new state machine from Task state to run state machine execution. | No hard limit on the number of events. |

###### Note

The type selection should be an informed choice as it can’t be changed after workflow creation.

You can use the Step Functions console to debug your workflows for failures on any other analysis, such as execution time, input, output, failure reason, or retry mechanism, which helps you diagnose production issues with ease.

## Amazon Managed Workflow for Apache Airflow

Apache Airflow is an open source tool for programmatically creating, scheduling, and monitoring workflows. The workflows can be created as Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) : a set of tasks executed in one direction without any loops. Apache Airflow uses message queues to orchestrate an arbitrary number of workers to the desired scale. A simple example could be ETL jobs that load data from multiple sources, transform the data, and then save it to a destination data store for analytics and insights.

A simplistic view of Airflow architecture with all the components involved in workflow execution is shown in Figure 12-3 . Let’s walk through the components:

Scheduler 

Triggers the scheduled workflows and submits tasks to the executor for execution

Executor 

A small component of the scheduler that determines the task’s execution style, such as sequential or parallel

Web server 

Powers the user interface

Metadata database

Stores the task and workflow states; you can use PostgreSQL, MySQL, or SQLite as a metadata database

[image: image]

###### Figure 12-3. Apache Airflow architecture

AWS takes the operational workload of Apache Airflow infrastructure management off the customer’s plate and offers Amazon MWAA as a managed service to scale as necessary. Here are some features that distinguish it from open source tools:

Scalability

You can define the minimum and maximum number of workers for the MWAA environment, and AWS handles the capacity management.

Security

You can use IAM roles and policies for access management to different AWS services, and all the workers and schedulers run in MWAA’s VPC , ensuring private fleet management. All data is encrypted by default using AWS KMS as added security. You can enable private or public access modes as necessary using AWS IAM policies and AWS IAM Identity Center . Public access mode ensures accessibility to the Apache Airflow server over the internet via a VPC endpoint; private access mode is only accessible in your VPC.

Operations management

Setup is very easy with a few clicks in the AWS Console, and you don’t have to worry about version upgrades or applying any security patches.

Monitoring

To monitor and analyze MWAA tasks and workflows, you can use Apache Airflow logs and metrics in Amazon CloudWatch.

Logs and metrics capabilities are required for monitoring the health of your applications as well as of AWS resources you’re using to create your infrastructure. Let’s turn our attention to the CloudWatch service, which offers these features.

# Amazon CloudWatch

Launching an application on the AWS cloud infrastructure is the first step, but now you have to ensure the application keeps running, serving customer traffic without any issues. Application metrics help you figure out the state of an application, such as traffic served by the application, API latency, and the health of the infrastructure. Engineers can set up alerts on top of these metrics for detecting anomalies, such as high failure of an API, and then debug the issue by looking at logs and metric graphs.

To monitor application health and debug any issues that occur, AWS offers Amazon CloudWatch. CloudWatch provides storage and search capability on application logs, visualizations of application metrics, and dashboards and alerts for any unexpected application behavior.

## Application Logs

As applications run to serve customer requests, logs are generated; these can be custom logs or logs specific to a language runtime. These logs help us debug any issues that have occurred in the system. You can publish logs to CloudWatch in real time for any compute platform you’re using and look for specific error logs via CloudWatch’s search functionality or the insights feature. Here are some key features and terminology associated with CloudWatch logs:

Log storage

CloudWatch can act as a central repository for all our application or other AWS service logs. The logs are part of a log stream , which is a sequence of log events that share the same source. All the log streams with similar properties, such as source, retention, monitoring, and access control settings, are part of a log group . For example, software applications have been set up to create hourly log streams, which means that every hour, a log stream is created like: log_stream_2023_05_15_07 (log_stream_name_year_month_day_hour).

Personally identifiable information (PII) data

We should avoid logging any PII, such as Social Security numbers, medical histories, and credit card details. This data might be pushed to production by mistake. To detect such logs, CloudWatch can identify and mask the log statement by leveraging pattern matching and ML.

Log search

You definitely need a search capability on top of your logs to help with debugging. CloudWatch supports multiple filters by following a pattern-matching syntax. You can use these filters to identify specific patterns in logs and publish a metric for them, such as counting the number of ERROR 400 messages for a particular API.

CloudWatch offers log insights as an additional feature for interactive search, analysis, and visualization of log data. You can search in up to 50 log groups in a single request via the supported query language , such as the total number of InternalServerExceptions across five microservice log groups.

For general visualization, such as of CPU utilization or total invocations of an API, where we don’t want to run queries to plot graphs on top of the data, an effective method is using CloudWatch metrics and alarms to raise alerts for any unexpected behavior.

## Metrics and Alarms

CloudWatch metrics help with application monitoring, enabling users to search and graph metrics and create alarms on top of them. For example, it can plot service custom metrics, such as the number of 500 HTTP error codes, and raise an alarm if the total count of 500 HTTP errors per minute is greater than 10 for a continuous 15 minutes. Let’s dig into metrics and alarms in a little more detail.

### Metrics

A metric is essentially a time-ordered set of data points sent to CloudWatch for visualization. As mentioned previously, the metrics can be AWS resource metrics or custom application metrics. Most AWS services publish some default metrics without charging customers, and you can definitely further tune them as necessary—for example, with minute-level granularity. Like log insights, CloudWatch’s metrics insights feature can be used to query and find patterns on different published metrics and create alarms for them. Let’s understand some terminology associated with metrics:

Namespace

A namespace is a root-level identifier to distinguish metrics from one another. For example, EC2 service metrics are captured in the EC2 namespace. We can also create custom namespaces; for example, multiple microservices in a single AWS account can be separated by namespaces.

Dimension

A dimension is a metric identification property represented by name-value pairs. A single metric can have up to 30 dimensions associated with it. For example, for representing API latency of a specific operation of an application, the namespace is the application name with two dimensions: API name and metric type.

Metric resolution

You can choose between standard resolution and high resolution, depending on the granularity required for your use case. Metrics are available at a minimum of one-minute granularity in standard resolution or one-second granularity in high resolution.

Statistics

Statistics can be used for data aggregation over a period of time. A couple of examples are maximum latency and sum of API invocations in the last hour. You can choose from a list of supported statistics according to your business needs, such as maximum, minimum, sample count, sum, average, percentile, and so on. Each statistic also has a unit associated with it, such as count, percentage, or seconds. For example, the average CPU utilization in the last hour would be shown as 75%.

For further analysis, CloudWatch metrics can be streamed to the destination of our choice in near real time in JSON or OpenTelemetry 0.7.0 format . A single metric stream can include up to one thousand filters, giving you control over the metrics you want to stream. Some use cases where this could apply include:

- Deliver metrics to Amazon S3 via Amazon KDF delivery stream. This can be useful (along with billing data) for looking for cost optimizations and resource performance.
- Choose third-party service providers as a destination for monitoring and troubleshooting applications.

Metrics are good for visualization and debugging purposes, but for raising an alert or sending a notification based on unexpected behavior, we should set up alarms.

### Alarms

Application monitoring is an important aspect of maintaining application health. Alarms monitor application metrics and notify users or other applications to take appropriate action when the configured thresholds are breached. For example, you can take autoscaling action by adding one instance when an application’s EC2 CPU utilization is greater than 75% and remove one instance when it is less than 30%. The following are some important things to consider when setting up alarms.

#### Metric

An alarm is set up on top of a single metric or a math expression on a combination of metrics. To set up an alarm, you should include all metric information, such as metric namespace, metric name, and all dimensions.

#### Alarm conditions

An alarm is invoked when specific conditions are met, and these conditions are defined by parameters like threshold type, alarm condition, data points to alarm, and missing data treatment. There are two supported types of threshold configurations: static and anomaly detection. Static configuration can be used to configure a specific threshold value on greater than, greater or equal to, lower than, and lower or equal to alarm conditions. Anomaly detection allows a band of values to be used as a threshold, with supported conditions outside of the band (greater than or less than), lower than, and greater than the band. We might not always want to raise an alarm with just one metric data point. This is a configurable property and can be set up per the alarm’s requirements.

There can be scenarios when the metric is not pushed to CloudWatch due to application issues or if there was no actual metric to be published for a specific time period. In both these cases, we can define how to treat the missing data. The supported behaviors are missing data being treated as good (within the threshold), bad (breaching the threshold), ignored (maintaining the current alarm state), and missing (transition alarm to insufficient data for alarm condition evaluation).

#### Configurable actions

The alarm can be in three states: an OK state, an in-alarm state, or insufficient data to evaluate the alarm. The alarm actions can be configured upon transition from one state to another. Supported alarm actions are notification, autoscaling action, EC2 action, and Systems Manager action. The notification action notifies people by sending a message to the SNS topic. The autoscaling action enables you to add or remove instances from an ASG per the alarm threshold. An EC2 action allows actions like rebooting, stopping, terminating, or recovering an EC2 instance. You can also set up a Systems Manager action by creating an OpsItem , which the operations team can look into and take appropriate action.

You can also create an alarm on top of multiple alarms, referred to as a composite alarm . This can help reduce operation noise by configuring the actions on composite alarms and skipping them on child alarms. The composite alarm is invoked based on the configured conditions or rule expressions , such as reach alarm state when all child alarms are in alarm state or when any one of them is in alarm state. For example, you could set up a composite alarm on application resource utilization, such as CPU utilization, memory usage, and storage space.

Figure 12-4 illustrates an application architecture in integration with Amazon CloudWatch for all the monitoring needs. The application pushes logs and metrics to AWS via CloudWatch APIs ( PutLogEvents and PutMetricData ), which can be viewed in the AWS Console for debugging or application monitoring. The alarms are activated upon a state change in a metric based on a certain threshold. Any state in AWS resources is captured by CloudWatch Events.

[image: image]

###### Figure 12-4. Application integration with Amazon CloudWatch

### Amazon CloudWatch Events

AWS services or resources transition from one state to another. For example, as you launch an EC2 machine, it transitions from a pending to a running state after its setup and configuration. These state changes can be streamed in near real time via CloudWatch Events to a desired destination so that you can take any appropriate action. Events can also be used to schedule automated actions using cron or rate expressions. For example, for our online food-delivery restaurant, we could run a Lambda function every day at 7 A.M. (similar to cron expressions) to aggregate the previous day’s earnings. Some other target destinations include Amazon EC2 instances, Amazon KDS, Amazon ECS tasks, AWS Systems Manager Run Command and Automation , Amazon SQS, and Amazon SNS topics.

AWS offers a service similar to CloudWatch Events called Amazon EventBridge. Both services have the same underlying architecture, but EventBridge offers more features to customers. EventBridge provides backward compatibility to CloudWatch Events APIs and works on a similar concept as CloudWatch Events: it receives an event for a state change and applies an associated rule to route this event to up to five targets .

The AWS Console automatically redirects to the EventBridge page upon selection of rules from the CloudWatch console. You can also use the CloudWatch Events page. We recommend using EventBridge for more features, such as event ingestion from software as a service (SaaS) applications. Let’s discuss a few of these added benefits in more detail:

Integration with SaaS providers

A PagerDuty application , for example, can be used to collect data from multiple platforms to provide a unified view that informs team members of any issue occurrence. Let’s say that based on a PagerDuty alert, there is a requirement to restart an EC2 machine. This action can be automated by sending an event to EventBridge, and it can deliver that event action to a specific target. If we remove EventBridge from the picture here, polling and custom webhooks are mostly used to fetch data from third-party providers to our software application. Polling can be compute intensive—you might receive empty responses multiple times—whereas webhooks require communication over the public internet. To address this, EventBridge allows integration with SaaS providers over private AWS networks without exposing the data to the public internet.

Custom event buses

An event bus provides a way to communicate from event senders to receivers. All events in CloudWatch Events are routed via the default event bus present in the AWS account, whereas EventBridge supports creation of custom event buses specific to customer workloads and controlled access.

Enhanced rules

EventBridge allows content-based filtering to filter values in events. This enables you to apply filtering at the EventBridge level, which helps your application to consume only the required event traffic. Additionally, you don’t need this filtering logic in your application.

Schema registry

EventBridge stores schemas for AWS services, integrated SaaS providers, and your custom events, helping with inference during the development process.

CloudWatch is an extremely important AWS service that ensures health monitoring of other AWS services and your custom applications deployed in the AWS cloud environment. Security of AWS services and resources is another important aspect to consider in order to avoid any misuse. The next section explores the AWS IAM service, which you can use for access control mechanisms in your AWS account.

# AWS Identity and Access Management

We touched on using IAM in multiple places in this book. IAM enables access control and enforces security measures in terms of authentication and authorization for different AWS resources or your overall AWS account. When you create your AWS account for the first time, you log in via root user credentials (with full administrative access), but when accessing different resources or allowing multiple people to log in and access an AWS account, we recommend you provide only the required access to avoid any misuse. This permissions granularity is defined via IAM users, groups, roles, and policies. For example, a support engineer might have only read-only access to CloudWatch logs, but a DevOps engineer might have access to create new log groups or delete existing log groups.

Before we check out IAM’s features and benefits, let’s discuss the basic terminology:

Root user

The root user is the user generated as you create your AWS account with email and password credentials. The root user essentially has all the permissions to perform any action in an AWS account and can’t be denied access by any explicit IAM policies. Service control policies (SCPs) are organization policies that can be used to limit the permissions of the root user of a member account. Create a separate administrative user to perform day-to-day tasks and using the root credentials for tasks that can be performed only by the root user, such as deleting an account, signing up for AWS GovCloud (US), and registering as a seller.

IAM user

An IAM user represents a person or service with a specific set of permissions to perform a task. IAM users have long-term credentials and don’t expire over time. The credentials can be a username and password for logging in to the AWS Console or a combination of an AWS secret key ID and AWS secret access key for logging programmatically. Avoid creating IAM users and using IAM roles with temporary credentials wherever possible. If creating IAM users is required, update passwords and rotate AWS secret keys regularly.

IAM group

IAM groups group users with the same set of permissions. You can’t log in to AWS accounts using group names, but groups make it easy to manage a similar set of users. This can be helpful when managing users with the same permissions by reducing the burden of assigning the same permissions again and again compared to just adding a new user to the group.

IAM role

An IAM role is similar to an IAM user but is not associated with a specific person or service. A role is temporarily assumed by a person, service, or another AWS account to perform any task. For example, applications running on an EC2 machine will assume a role to make API calls to other resources, such as downloading a file from S3. This ensures temporary access only for the needed time and is automatically revoked after that. IAM roles can be created with restricted access, which helps prevent any unintended changes to the AWS resources environment. We recommend IAM roles over IAM users with temporary access for a limited period. There may be some use cases where IAM users will be explicitly required, such as third-party workloads that are unable to assume IAM roles, AWS CodeCommit access, Amazon Keyspaces access, or any IAM users created for emergency issues; you should ensure multifactor authentication (MFA) in those cases.

IAM policy

An IAM policy is a JSON object (apart from the ACL policy type, which we discussed in Chapter 10 and is based on an XML structure ) representing a set of permissions that is attached to an IAM identity (user, group, or role) or an AWS resource. Recall the example regarding how EC2 can be given access to download objects from S3. For that role to have S3 download permissions, you need to attach an IAM policy like the following:

```
{
  “Version”: “2012-10-17”,
  “Statement”: [
    {
      “Effect”: “Allow”,
      “Action”: [“s3:ListBucket”],
      “Resource”: [“arn:aws:s3:::samplebucket”]
    },
    {
      “Effect”: “Allow”,
      “Action”: [
        “s3:GetObject”
      ],
      “Resource”: [“arn:aws:s3:::samplebucket/*”]
    }
  ]
}
```

The JSON document of the IAM policy essentially contains Effect as Allow or Deny , with Action specifying all the resource operations and Resource specifying the determined resources, along with additional elements such as Condition , Principal , and Sid .

In Chapter 9 , we discussed bringing Cafe Delhi Heights online in relation to different AWS storage services. We’ve now created an AWS account to host and operate the restaurant online and hired many people to help us out. Everyone contributing to the development and testing of the software applications will require access to the AWS account. There are multiple ways to provide access:

- Share the root credentials with everyone on the team. We don’t recommend this option as it provides complete access to everyone. This is not required and might be misused—either knowingly or unknowingly.
- Create IAM users and associate them to groups like developer-group, devops-group, and support-group. This can be considered a preferred option, but there are some downsides, as we discussed previously.
- We might already be managing the team via some identity provider (IdP), such as Google, Facebook, or Amazon. We can create an IAM Identity Provider entity to establish trust between the IdP and the AWS account. This enables all users to assume an IAM role for a limited time with a limited set of permissions without exposing AWS access keys.

As different teams work together, there will always be use cases where one team requires access to an AWS resource in another team’s AWS account, or it could be possible that multiple teams own resources in the same account. For these scenarios, access can be managed via trust and permissions policies referred to as delegation . The trust policy specifies trusted account members that are allowed to assume a role, and the permission policy specifies what permissions a trusted user has to perform a task.

AWS IAM helps with securing and managing access to different AWS resources. AWS offers another service, Amazon Cognito, for user pool management working as an IdP and many other features for user authentications.

# Amazon Cognito

Amazon Cognito is a fully managed, highly scalable customer identity and access management (CIAM) service that enables customers to set up and manage their identity pools for authentication (AuthN) and authorization (AuthZ). Cognito takes complete ownership of managing compute and storage for supporting this. You can use Cognito for new user registrations, existing user logins, guest user maintenance, and access control definition. Let’s take a look at a simple example: we want customers of our online restaurant to be able to upload images along with food reviews. To allow customers to upload an image directly to our AWS account’s S3 bucket, we can provide temporary write access via Cognito.

###### Note

AuthN establishes the identity of an entity, and AuthZ determines what this entity has access to.

In AWS account access terms, AuthN establishes whether you can log in to an AWS account, and AuthZ establishes whether you can access a specific AWS resource.

To understand how Cognito works, you should understand the following concepts:

Identity provider

An IdP stores and manages users’ digital identities. Cognito itself can act as an IdP, and you can integrate it with third-party IdPs like Google, Amazon, and Facebook (supported protocols are OAuth 2.0 , SAML , and OpenID ). For example, you will likely see Google as a sign-in choice on many applications you use day to day. The IdP is also called the federated identity since it can be used across platforms for user authentication. Creating a trust relationship between AWS and an external IdP is called federation .

User pool

A user pool is a user directory that acts as an IdP. The user records are stored in the user pool directory for users signed in via both Cognito or a third-party integrated IdP. It also supports all the features like signup, forgotten password, login, password lengths and policy, and MFA.

Identity pool

Identity pools provide temporary credentials for application access for both authenticated and nonauthenticated users by taking valid tokens, such as a JSON Web Token (JWT) or SAML token, as input. The temporary role can be assigned to users based on different tags that you specify. For our example of ordering food online, the users are allowed to look for food and select items without logging into the system, but to place an order, users must be logged in. This can be managed by redirecting to Amazon Cognito Hosted UI once the user clicks “place order” and then redirecting to payments to confirm the order.

User pool Hosted UI

We need some kind of user interface for users to sign up or log in to our application. Cognito offers a URL hosted by AWS for interaction between users and the application. This interface can include email, password for login, or any integrated third-party IdPs, as shown in Figure 12-5 . Once users are authenticated, they are directed to a specific application page specified as a redirect URL. We can also customize the UI page as necessary, such as with a custom logo or CSS.

[image: A screenshot of a login form

Description automatically generated]

###### Figure 12-5. Amazon Cognito Hosted UI

Triggers

You can consume Cognito Events , such as user preauthentication or postauthentication, and run AWS Lambda functions based on them via triggers. The Lambda triggers run extra logic for AuthN and AuthZ of users for underlying applications. For example, you can run a custom set of rules for validation, such as noting that the user location for accessing a particular web page should be India before a user can sign up to the application.

Software applications can interact with Cognito for AuthN and AuthZ in different ways:

- Users interact with Cognito via the frontend application to get a token and use the same token in subsequent API calls. The backend application can interact with Cognito via AWS SDK Amazon Cognito APIs to validate those tokens against the users.
- Cognito provides native integration with AmazonAPI Gateway without any customer efforts. When application APIs are offered via AmazonAPI Gateway, manual token verification is not required, and verification can be handled automatically per the configurations.
- To reduce manual setup at your end, you can use AWS Amplify to automatically create the required infrastructure. You can then use AWS SDK to interact with Cognito.

###### Note

You can always build a custom AuthN and AuthZ solution on your own instead of using Cognito. We’ll compare these options in much more detail in Chapter 16 .

Let’s get back to our example of using Cognito to assign temporary credentials for uploading an object to Amazon S3. There are essentially two ways of doing this:

S3 presigned URL

A presigned URL can be created with specific permissions on an S3 bucket or a specific object—note that the creator of the presigned URL should have the permissions to create it. The one downside of this approach could be predefining the object key name, so to create presigned URLs at runtime, you need some compute layer in between. For example, an AWS Lambda captures the filename from a client, creates an S3 presigned URL, and responds to clients to further upload an object.

Amazon Cognito

You can use Cognito’s identity pools to assign temporary credentials to users and allow them to directly upload files to S3. Using this definitely depends on the kind of use case you’re working on as this option requires Cognito setup. It could make our work easier if there is already a setup in place for users’ AuthN and AuthZ.

These options can also be used in conjunction as Cognito authenticates users and AWS Lambda handles generation of presigned URLs.

We discussed temporary role assignment based on different tags in identity pools—the role can also be assigned based on token and IAM policy, such that you get the role-related information as part of the token and you can use the same to assign the role. For requirements with dynamic role creation, attributes for access control can be helpful in IAM policies.

With the fast pace of development, AWS really helps by providing services like IAM or Cognito for AuthN and AuthZ so that we don’t need to build solutions from the ground up. Yet another service is AWS AppSync to help frontend and backend teams scale independently in the development of APIs at a large scale. Let’s look into what AWS AppSync has to offer.

# AWS AppSync

To fully understand how AWS AppSync works, first let’s consider how food items are displayed to customers on our online food-ordering platform. The frontend application displays the food items along with their prices, restaurant coupons, reviews, and the like. This data is maintained by different applications in a backend microservice architecture. The frontend application has two options: to invoke APIs of each service and gather data or to have a single API that collects data from all these different backend services and returns that data to the frontend.

Recall that we discussed GraphQL in Chapter 6 . AppSync is essentially a single GraphQL endpoint that can be used to query multiple databases, microservices, and APIs in a single network call. In our example, we can use AppSync to expose a single endpoint to the frontend, which can gather data from different microservices. AppSync can also be used to create pub/sub APIs to publish notifications to subscribed clients, such as real-time sports updates via fully managed, serverless WebSocket connections.

Here are the base components you should be aware of to start using AppSync:

GraphQL schema

A data model specifying the query pattern for data retrieval.

Resolvers 

The components that provide a link between the schema and different data sources. They convert the GraphQL payload to the underlying system protocol and execute if there are associated IAM permissions.

Data source 

The data destination from which resolvers can fetch the data using the access credentials, such as Amazon DynamoDB, Amazon RDS, AWS Lambda, and HTTP endpoints. The data sources shown in Figure 12-6 can be present in the same AWS account or in different AWS accounts.

[image: A diagram of a diagram

Description automatically generated]

###### Figure 12-6. AppSync integration with multiple data sources

Merged API

A single AppSync API constructed from a merge operation of multiple source APIs, GraphQL schemas, resolvers, and data sources. The source APIs can be managed by independent teams, and they can collaborate via the merged API.

Now you might argue, why use AppSync instead of deploying your own GraphQL infrastructure? The primary reason is removing operational overhead for features such as AuthN and AuthZ, caching, and encryption from the customer’s plate. AppSync also simplifies building advanced use cases such as chat applications, location-aware notifications, live gaming scoreboards, and offline support along with AWS Amplify . To provide these benefits, AppSync is a fully serverless application that offers build-time composition of merged APIs and easy integration with AWS services like AWS WAF, Amazon CloudWatch, Amazon Cognito, and TLS encryption support.

# Conclusion

As you know by this point, AWS offers a wide variety of services, and it is very important to understand your business requirements to know how to utilize the best services for your goals. You’ll notice that some services have similar features, such as when we compare MSK to SQS-SNS or to KDS.

Or consider that a fully managed serverless application like AWS Step Functions will not give us full visibility into how workflows are orchestrated behind the scenes, but the important question is: do we really need to know that? Because Step Functions is saving us a lot of management and operations costs, with additional debugging capabilities via visual workflows.

We also stressed application monitoring as an important aspect of ensuring high availability and how this can also be achieved by placing metrics, logs, and alarms in Amazon CloudWatch. We then dove into how AuthN and AuthZ services can help secure our applications and how different components in the AWS infrastructure environment can communicate with one another in a secure and restricted way. We recommend following the principle of least privilege: providing the application, user, or another AWS account with only the minimum set of permissions required to perform an operation.

In the next chapter, we’ll explore how to launch big data and ML workloads on the AWS cloud and operate at large scale to serve customers.
