# Chapter 15. Designing a Web Crawler and Search Engine

You have planned a get-together with your loved ones during the holiday season. You love cooking and have decided to cook all the food by yourself, but you don’t have the recipes for the dishes you wish to prepare. What is the best possible resolution here? You could ask your friends if they have the recipes or go looking through cookbooks, but a simple yet effective solution is using Google search. Google looks across the internet and finds the best results for how to prepare a specific dish. How does Google go through such a vast sea of information and find the perfect answer? In this chapter, we’ll try to figure this out by digging into the architecture of such search systems.

At a high level, the entire system consists of two subsystems: a web crawler and a search engine, as shown in Figure 15-1 . A web crawler is essentially software responsible for crawling through web content. Content on the internet is growing exponentially, and web crawlers need to regularly crawl the content to maintain the most updated results. The search engine sits on top of content accumulated by web crawlers and stores it in such a way that it can look for user-searched keywords in the content and present the most useful results.

With this basic understanding, let’s start by gathering the functional and nonfunctional requirements of the proposed system.

[image: image]

###### Figure 15-1. Ten-thousand-foot view of the web crawler and search engine architecture

# System Requirements

Web crawlers can be used for multiple purposes, so focusing on one use case makes it easy to move in the right direction with our design. For this chapter, content retrieval via search engine is the main problem statement we’re trying to solve, but you could also look into other issues, such as web-monitoring tasks like copyright infringement. A web crawler is needed in the system to gather the data, but from the user’s perspective, the product is a search engine.

## Functional and Nonfunctional Requirements

The functional requirements of the system include:

- Getting the top results (web page title, subtitle, and URL) for a user search query
- Identifying the content freshness rate of the results, which are frequently updated

The NFRs include:

Highly available

The system can serve user queries most of the time.

Highly reliable

Queries should be served correctly.

Highly scalable 

The system should be able to handle increasing scale, such as number of webpages and content on those webpages.

Low latency for search queries

Even with the huge number of pages mapping to a user query, the system should return the most relevant results within milliseconds.

Data freshness

The underlying storage to serve search queries should be regularly updated.

Data consistency is not highly critical for this use case. A lag in content available on websites and searchable via the search engine is acceptable.

We should also document the system boundaries , or what the system is not expected to do. For this use case, that includes:

- The system will not include recommendation and content-relevance algorithms for gathering the search results.
- The search doesn’t support near real-time search results—for example, the live score of an ongoing cricket match.

Next, let’s jump to the expected scale for this system.

## System Scale

The system has two components: the web crawler and the search engine. Both components can be independent systems in themselves, and we’ll structure the chapter content to discuss them independently. This makes sense since the requirements of both these systems vary and they are expected to solve different use cases, with the output of one system (the web crawler) being used as input to the other system (the search engine). We’ll make some assumptions for each to determine the expected scale of the system.

### Web crawler

Important considerations for the web crawler are the number of pages on the web to be crawled and how often these pages need to be crawled. According to a quick Google search, around 1.13 billion websites have been created as of June 2023, and around 200 million of those are active. The web crawler system is only concerned with the active websites. Inside a single website, there can be internal redirects or external redirects to different pages. The external redirects are already counted as part of the 200 million websites, but we need to consider the internal redirects. We’ll make assumptions for the average numbers and use the following calculation to determine how much storage we’ll need:

Active websites = 200 million

Average pages/website = 50

Total pages = 200 million × 50 = 10 billion

Average page size = 2 MB

Total storage = 2 MB × 10 billion = 20 PB

Web pages can include different forms of content, such as text, images, and videos. The web crawler should only crawl and keep the data that will be used by the search engine. We’ll limit the scope of the system to only support text queries in the English language. This will also potentially reduce the storage space—let’s say 500 KB per page, amounting to 5 PB of total storage. Another consideration here is the requirement to store the entire page.

###### Note

The storage requirement calculated in this book assumes that content is stored in the same format as it is received, but this can certainly vary based on data store selection, data compression algorithms wherever applicable, separate caching data store, and so on.

The content on the internet keeps adding up in the form of new websites and web pages, and the content on existing web pages is constantly updated. The system needs to ensure content freshness so that it stores the most relevant data to offer the ideal search experience.

Let’s look into the scale of the search engine system next.

### Search engine

What do we estimate the number of requests per second to the search engine system will be? Users open the browser and search with some keywords, and the system should be able to respond with search results that match the search query. Let’s consider Google’s scale since it is basically the most visited website in the world. Google serves roughly 8.5 billion searches per day (99,000 RPS). To support the search scale, data should be indexed, which requires storage space apart from what we discussed for the web crawler requirements.

We’ll work to build a scalable system and talk about key concepts involved in the system, but keep in mind that Google has evolved a lot to support this scale, and it will not be possible to capture all such details in a single chapter. Here are some factors we should consider:

- The search results can vary based on geographical region. For example, a search query with the keywords “latest news” might generate different results in India than it does in the US.
- The system can receive similar search queries from different users, and it should include good caching capabilities to make queries faster.

With these requirements and scale considerations, let’s now dig deeper into the design of the system.

# Starting with the Design

As we did in “System Requirements” , we’ll discuss the system design analysis for the web crawler and the search engine systems separately. Before we dig deeper into the design, we recommend reading through the Google architecture paper published in 1997 . This paper nicely captures the high-level architecture of web crawler and search engine systems as shown in Figure 15-2 and serves as the starting point for the system-design analysis.

[image: image]

###### Figure 15-2. Google reference architecture from 1997

Here is a summary of the architecture presented in the technical paper:

1. To start the crawling process, a URL server provides a list of URLs to the crawler system to fetch web pages from the internet. Each crawler maintains its own DNS cache for faster lookups.
2. The store server receives the web pages gathered by the crawler, and it compresses (using ZLIB compression) and stores the HTML content of every web page to a repository . The repository data structure is an independent component and can be used to build all the other data structures in the design.
3. The indexer reads the web pages from the repository, uncompresses them, and parses the content. The functions performed by the indexer include: Parsing of content to ensure removal of any erroneous or unwanted content, such as non-ASCII characters. Assigning an identification, called a doc ID , to any new URLs (web links) found by parsing the web pages. All the important information about links, such as where the link is pointing from and to and the text of the link, is stored in data structures referred to as anchors . Converting every word into a word ID using an in-memory hash table called a lexicon . Storing the occurrences of the word IDs in the document in a set of barrels in the form of partially sorted forward indexes called hits . The hits include the actual word, the position of the word in the document, the approximate font size, and capitalization. These characteristics help determine the relevance of words as compared to other words in the document; for instance, a large font size at the beginning of the document can represent the heading of the document.
4. The URL resolver reads the anchor files and converts relative URLs into absolute URLs, which map to the doc IDs, with these additional responsibilities: Putting the anchor text into the forward index barrel associated with the doc ID that the anchor is pointed to Generating a database of links that are pairs of doc IDs; the link database is used to compute page rank for all the documents
5. The sorter sorts the forward barrels (organized by doc ID) by word ID to generate the inverted index for the title, anchor hits, and full text. The sorter further divides a barrel into baskets of short or full barrels based on whether they can fit into main memory.
6. A web server runs the searcher to serve the search queries. To process any search query, it parses the query, converts words into word IDs, seeks to the beginning of the doc list for every word in the search query in the short barrel, finds the document matching all the words, and computes the rank of the document. It then performs the same set of operations on the full barrel. Finally, it sorts the matching rank documents and returns the top one thousand as the response.

###### Note

Forward and inverted indexes are terms often used in search use cases. The forward index is a mapping of the doc ID to a set of words or keywords. The inverted index is an inverse mapping of the forward index containing the mapping from keywords to doc ID.

## Designing the Web Crawler

We’ll expand on the architecture from the previous section to design a scalable web crawler system. The first thing we’ll need to consider is the list of URLs that the system should start with (the seed URLs ) for crawling the web. How should this list be maintained, and how should it be updated on a regular basis? There is no unified source that can be used to retrieve all the URLs to be used in the seed URL list. The only way to build this list is by starting out with the most-known domains (for example, the one thousand most popular domains) and then constantly updating the list on web crawls. The steps to building this list are:

1. Create a platform for new website owners to submit their site details to make them available for crawling.
2. Retrieve the list of website links or references in the website being crawled.
3. When a user queries for a new website, check this website and add it to the list.

The crawling frequency of the web crawler system is not fixed and can vary from website to website. Historical analysis of the website is one way to determine the crawling frequency. This helps determine if the website is frequently or rarely updated. News websites can be frequently updated with fresh content, but personal websites are usually updated more rarely.

Let’s discuss one potential architecture based on web page recrawling at a fixed, regular time interval, as shown in Figure 15-3 . The architecture describes a potential implementation idea and has the following steps:

1. The seed URLs database stores the URL with zero TTL or an appropriate TTL so that not all URLs are pushed to the queue at the same time. Implementation of change data capture upon TTL expiration can vary based on database choice; for example, DynamoDB streams can be leveraged.
2. Upon TTL expiration, URLs are pushed to the queue, and the web crawler consumes them.
3. The web crawler retrieves the content of a web page from the internet and sends it for additional processing, such as building indexes.
4. The web crawler saves the URL again to the database with a new TTL. As the web crawler processes the web page content, extra web links are included, which are also pushed to the queue for processing.

[image: image]

###### Figure 15-3. Recrawling of web pages based on configured TTL

A web crawler system should have a change-detection algorithm deployed to efficiently figure out if the content is updated without crawling it entirely. Here are few ways to accomplish that:

- ETag (entity tag) is an HTTP response header that uniquely represents a requested source and is typically a hash of the content. The ETag value can be used to determine if the requested web page has changed. The Last-Modified HTTP response header containing the date and time of the last modification is another way of knowing when the resource was last updated.
- Content comparison can validate content modification. However, it is definitely not an efficient process to compare word by word—this is essentially the same as reading the entire web page. A more efficient solution is figuring out specific portions of the page where the content is updated. One such solution is a Merkle tree (discussed in Chapter 3 ), which efficiently evaluates the updated section; it is generally used by databases like Dynamo to resolve anti-entropy among multiple replicas. Google crawler uses the Simhash algorithm to help figure out content duplication of web pages.
- Occasionally, a website will become popular because a celebrity shared it over social media. The web crawler can detect such traffic surges, then recrawl the website for any content update.

Earlier, we mentioned a queue that can be used to push the URL for a web crawler to consume. The TTL approach based on time is not generally used directly in the large-scale web crawlers because the page to be crawled next can depend on many factors other than TTL. The TTL factor in web crawler terms is referred to as politeness , meaning how frequently a crawler fetches content from the web page server. This can happen too often if the URLs referenced in the web page belong to the same domain. Another important factor is figuring out the high-quality pages that need to be crawled as a priority. The system responsible for determining the next URL to be crawled in the web crawler architecture is generally called the URL frontier .

### Improving the URL frontier

The previous architecture can be extended to address limitations and takes both priority and politeness into consideration. The architecture is referenced from the Mercator web crawler architecture and is shown in Figure 15-4 .

[image: image]

###### Figure 15-4. URL frontier architecture

The functions of the different components of the URL frontier system are as follows:

Prioritizer and front queues

The prioritizer and front queues (first in, first out) are responsible for figuring out the priority in which the URL should be crawled by the web crawler system. The prioritizer assigns the priority to the URL from 1 to n , and based on this number, the URL is pushed to a specific front queue. The priority-assigning algorithm can take several factors into consideration, such as percentage change in the web page between two crawls, newness of the web page, user traffic on the page, and more.

Front queue selector and back queue router

This component is responsible for taking the URLs based on the priority and passing them to the back queues. It maintains an additional database to keep domain-to-back-queue numbers to ensure that the URLs from the same host are served via a single back queue. This is done to make sure that a single domain is called once at most (or per the domain configurations at the search engine level ) by the web crawler.

Back queues

Back queues enforce politeness of the URL to ensure that the web server is not bombarded too frequently (a single request at a time, with some lag between the requests). The number of back queues should be more than the number of crawler threads available in the system to ensure that every thread is busy at any given time. This can be configured as three times the number of threads to start and later tuned with proper performance testing of the system.

Priority queue

The priority queue is a heap implementation that stores one entry for each back queue and provides the time at which a particular host (or domain) can be contacted again. The heap is created upon min-heap implementation, and the root element provides the URL that can be contacted first.

Back queue selector

The back queue selector interacts with the heap to take out the root containing the domain with the minimum time and then take out the URL from that particular back queue. Once the URL is crawled by the crawler, the heap is updated with the new time to configure a new politeness value.

The FIFO queues in the architectures keep a fixed number of URLs in the main memory and store most of the URLs on the disk to support a high crawl rate on commodity hardware. Even with the best machines, disk support is required, considering the scale of the internet. The disk-storage algorithms can become a bottleneck for processing a huge number of URLs due to very frequent reads and writes to the disk, as pointed out in the IRLBot research paper , which tested results with 184,000 new URLs generated per second from crawled web pages.

###### Note

The current design and implementation of large-scale web crawlers such as Google and Bing are proprietary and are not available to the general public. We referenced several public research papers along with our own knowledge base to ensure that the web crawler system’s scalability could support today’s internet scale.

IRLBot suggests the disk repository with the update management (DRUM) algorithm as an algorithm for ensuring URL uniqueness. DRUM maintains k memory arrays, each of size M, and k disk buckets (Qi) and spreads key-value pairs between them based on the key. The data is moved to disk buckets as memory arrays get filled up. For pages with a lot of sub-URLs (in the millions), the politeness rate limiting can become a bottleneck. IRLBot solves this via the spam tracking and avoidance through reputation (STAR) algorithm. The reputation of a page is calculated based on in-degree links from other domain web pages. There is always a possibility that some web pages don’t show much relevance because they are new or have fewer in-degree links, but they should also be crawled to ensure that search engines can support any user queries. This is solved by the budget enforcement with anti-spam tactics (BEAST) algorithm. BEAST maintains an additional queue to all such URLs and keeps reevaluating their relevance to figure out when the URLs should be crawled by the web crawler system.

The web crawler system should also ensure that infinite-loop scenarios are avoided while crawling the web. It can happen that a URL is referenced at multiple places in a single web page (or on multiple web pages during a single crawl of the system) or that a URL contains a reference to itself.

### URL uniqueness and duplicate detection

The system needs a mechanism for duplicate URL detection. This can be done by having a separate global database across the crawler machines that maintains the list of URLs visited in a single crawl. Since the query to determine whether the URL is a duplicate needs to be fast and doesn’t need to be persisted across the crawls, we can use Redis and store the URLs as keys. The Redis cluster can contain TTL policies associated with a URL (which vary from URL to URL) so that the URL is automatically removed from the cache.

Using Bloom filters is another technique for determining whether a URL was visited or not—the key consideration here is the probabilistic nature of Bloom filters. It is possible that the Bloom filter returns yes for an already-crawled URL, causing a recrawl of the URL.

The crawler will also respect any exclusions on the web server configured in a robots.txt file. The robots.txt file determines whether a web page is allowed for crawling or whether any specific resource is not to be indexed by search engines. On top of exclusions by the web server, there are exclusions maintained by the web crawler to avoid visiting and indexing content from any blocked websites.

Let’s combine all the components we discussed to present a final picture of the web crawler system in Figure 15-5 . There are a few additional items to consider for the system:

- The crawler is a multiregion deployment, and performance improves if the crawler crawls from the same location where a website is located. Some sites, such as government websites, are blocked from being accessed from other countries, so then it becomes necessary for the crawler to run in the same region where the site is located.
- The crawler mostly uses the HTTP/1.1 protocol version to retrieve web pages. It can use more recent HTTP versions, such as HTTP/2, depending on whether that’s supported by the website. The newer version saves computing resources for both the crawler and the website.
- The content on some websites can be so large that the web crawler always upper-caps on the bandwidth consumption. For example, it will only download 15 MB of content and skip the rest of it.

[image: image]

###### Figure 15-5. Web crawler architecture

The web crawler’s job finishes as soon as the web page is downloaded. The search engine system then takes this content as input and indexes it efficiently to serve user search queries. Let’s explore the architecture of the search engine system next.

## Designing the Search Engine

The search engine system takes a user query as input and provides relevant web pages in response to the query. The web pages are downloaded and stored to a repository (or some kind of database) by the web crawler system, which we discussed in the last section. The search engine should be able to figure out the best matching results for the user search query from this content repository. We’ll define a high-level architecture of the search engine system, as shown in Figure 15-6 , and then explore each of the components.

After the crawler downloads the web pages to the content store, the document parser and encoder is responsible for tasks like parsing the documents and removing unuseful data and then passing the data to the forward index . The forward index stores the data, and then it is passed to the inverted index for reverse mapping. For any user search query, the query is parsed to the search keywords. The content relevance system (such as PageRank) computes the most relevant results and returns them to the user.

You might wonder why we need a forward index in the architecture since the inverted index should be sufficient to serve user queries efficiently, and it’s a valid question. The creation of the forward index allows for storing the words as they are parsed from the web page, enabling the inverted index to be a completely independent process that can happen asynchronously. Several different open source solutions have been built to support the inverted-index data structure creation. Let’s discuss our options for the search engine system in the next section.

[image: image]

###### Figure 15-6. High-level architecture of the search engine system

### Indexing strategies

We’ll start the discussion by exploring the architecture of open source search solutions such as Elasticsearch and Amazon OpenSearch (which we discussed briefly in Chapter 10 ). Many organizations like Netflix use Elasticsearch to build inverted indexes and build search functionality on top of them. Elasticsearch is a nonrelational data store service that can be used to store JSON documents, and Elasticsearch constructs inverted indexes to support search queries on the stored data.

An index is quite similar to an Amazon RDS table. The indexes are further divided into subindexes called shards (the shards internally map to the Lucene index ; Elasticsearch is built on top of Lucene). The documents are stored on the shards; a document is like a row in the RDS table. Each shard consists of multiple segments, which are kept in memory (and a transaction log on disk to overcome failures) and are synced to disk in fixed time intervals (referred to as refresh intervals ). A segment is an immutable data structure and is available for search once it is saved to disk. If a use case requires data to be available for search as soon as it is written, the refresh interval can be configured to a lower value. The smaller segments are merged into a larger segment from time to time, improving the overall search performance (search needs to be performed on a smaller set of segments). We’ll discuss shard configurations more in Chapter 18 .

To support high availability and read scale, the shards are replicated on multiple data nodes, as shown in Figure 15-7 . The data is written to the primary shard on one of the data nodes and then replicated to replica shards asynchronously. The system tries to ensure that primary and replica shards are not colocated on the same data node (given that the Elasticsearch cluster has that number of nodes per the shards configuration).

[image: A diagram of a diagram

Description automatically generated]

###### Figure 15-7. Data indexing and replication between Elasticsearch shards

Now take a look at data node 1 in Figure 15-7 : it contains primary shard 1 and replicas for shards 2 and 3. The replicas are useful for scaling the read operations without affecting the write performance, but the key consideration here is that all three shards share the same CPU and RAM resources of the data node, where one shard is responsible for writes and the other two for reads. Elasticsearch uses disk to store the indexes and offers multiple caching techniques on top of that to make queries faster.

The reads can be scaled by adding more replicas, but what about the primary shard? If there are issues with a data node consisting of a primary shard, that can affect the indexing performance until the data node is recovered or replaced by some other node, becoming a bottleneck in the overall architecture. In Elasticsearch architecture, the search engine is responsible for indexing the data and uses the same index to support user search queries. This can potentially introduce a bottleneck of one operation affecting the performance of another, meaning reads and writes are happening on the index at the same time. There can be sudden traffic bursts in any one of them that impact the other—for example, a viral search keyword queried by a large number of users in the same timestamp. In Part II , we covered the architecture of multiple AWS services, and the key was decoupling compute and storage in services like Amazon Redshift, Amazon EMR, Amazon Aurora, and so on. Along similar lines, is it possible to architect the system in such a way that both write and read operations can scale independently and are completely decoupled?

To resolve this, we can leverage cloud object storage as intermediary storage where indexing engines can upload the data and search engines can download the data, as shown in Figure 15-8 . Multipart upload and download ensure uploading of the large files in chunks to provide better reliability and ease in reuploading or redownloading a smaller chunk if the operation fails. Keep shard sizes relatively small (not too small, to only a few GBs), which helps improve indexing latency. This also makes scaling (adding or removing nodes) search and indexing clusters faster due to the reduction in data-rebalancing overhead.

###### Note

We’ll discuss optimal shard size for Elasticsearch clusters more in Chapter 18 .

[image: image]

###### Figure 15-8. Decoupled indexing and search systems

The other benefits of cloud storage options like Amazon S3 are no management overhead of persistent backups and cross-AZ and -region replication. In short, we’re getting all the cloud storage availability benefits in the search engine system. It is always a point of discussion: deciding whether to use a cloud provider or to fully manage a custom solution on your own at such a huge scale. There is no foolproof answer, and we recommend reevaluating as your system requirements, cloud-pricing considerations, and need for control over the service evolve.

We ensured that the indexing and search processes can scale independently. Now, to address the indexing-system bottleneck on write operations, the system can use the following mechanisms:

- Write operations should be done in batch or bulk instead of single-write operations for each and every query. This will help reduce load on the system.
- Instead of leader-follower (primary-secondary shard) architecture, the system can be designed to support leader-leader architecture where data is written to multiple primary shards at the same time, with a consensus and quorum algorithms in place. If there is a single leader, there is no requirement for consensus and quorum, so there are trade-offs in both approaches.

We’re clear on the fact that we’re not using Elasticsearch or Amazon OpenSearch for building the search engine system and that we need a custom solution to build the inverted indexes. The custom solution can be built on top of Apache Lucene library or completely from scratch, depending on further analysis. An inverted index can be really huge given the amount of data, and the system will include a mechanism for dividing the data into multiple machines and clusters. A single huge index cluster is tough to manage compared to multiple small clusters (well, not too small) and can become a bottleneck in the architecture. How should an inverted index be divided into a set of machines? We can represent an inverted index as a mapping from a keyword to the list of doc IDs and the frequency of the word’s appearance in the document:

```
Term (key) - {docId, frequency} (value)
Hello - [{doc1, 5}, {doc2, 3}, {doc4, 1}]
World - [{doc1, 5}, {doc3, 4}]
```

There are two approaches to dividing the data here:

Document-based

All the terms from a document are stored on a single machine, offering the benefit of calculating page relevance easily (if all the words in a search query are present in a single document, the system can retrieve the result from a single machine only). To gather search results, the primary instance forwards the query to all the worker instances and then combines the results to respond to the user queries.

Term-based

To simply illustrate this, assume the system has extracted 100 terms out of the crawled web pages. These 100 terms are divided into a set of machines: 10 machines with 10 terms each. To respond to search queries, the primary instance can figure out which worker instances to go to; it doesn’t need all the workers as in the case of document-based partitioning. The downside of this approach is creating an intersection of search results because the terms corresponding to the same document can reside on different machines and require data transfer over the network.

Based on these trade-offs, we’ll choose document-based partitioning to maintain the inverted indexes. Let’s discuss scaling of search nodes to facilitate the user read operations next.

### Improving search performance

Latency is super critical; it is important that the user queries are answered in submilliseconds. The ideal suggestion is that the search nodes should keep all the data primarily in RAM, meaning all the inverted indexes are cached, but this comes with a cost. Disk is about a hundred times cheaper than RAM, and considering the scale requirements, the cost differentiation between disk and RAM can be huge.

In the case when all the data is kept in main memory, is there a requirement for persistent storage? For any node failures, the data can always be downloaded from cloud storage. It’s a tough call to make, and we recommend keeping the inverted indexes as backups in disk storage as well. Yes, they can always be downloaded from cloud storage, but that can take more time compared to local disk seeks.

There are pros and cons associated with any approach we take—whether indexes are completely in memory or disk. We can take a middle ground to keep the majority of indexes in memory (most frequently accessed) with disk as a persistence option. The indexing algorithm will ensure that the data is stored in a manner requiring minimum disk-seek operations (ideally, one). Compression of data then becomes important in case the maximum amount of data resides in the main memory.

### Data compression

We discussed the storage space requirements for the web crawler based on a few assumptions in “System Requirements” . The general idea of compression is that the operations of compressing and then decompressing will add to the latency of both indexing and search. This is because the system is spending some time first compressing and then, at a later stage, decompressing the data to support user search queries. One thing we’re 100% sure of is that compression can save storage space.

Given that decompression can severely impact the search latency, we should think about latency a bit more. The search latency is critical in the system; indexing latency is also critical, but we can survive with a little lag because it is saving us the huge storage cost and we’re fine with an eventual consistent system. We’ll compare the considerations when the inverted index resides on disk versus when it resides completely in memory:

Inverted index in memory

To process an inverted index list without compression requires two steps: moving data from memory to CPU cache and then processing it. With compression, an extra step of decompressing the data is added. The operation of moving data from memory to CPU cache becomes really fast with compressed data, and decompression takes relatively less time. So essentially, the search-query latency is improved with compression of the data.

Inverted index on disk

This adds the step of moving the data from disk to main memory, but it performs well because we’re moving less data. This increases the search-query evaluation speed, giving us the benefit of low storage cost plus the improved performance with the compression in place in the system.

Taking all of this into consideration, we can see that the search queries are quite faster in responding to user requests with compression in place.

Now think of a scenario when a particular search query becomes popular and the system receives a lot of requests with the same search query—this may become a bottleneck in the search system. To overcome this, the system ensures that autoscaling is in place to replicate the data on more nodes to serve queries. It also maintains a cache layer in the same region as users to serve the same search queries without even hitting the search system’s inverted indexes. This ensures that the search system is not affected and that user queries are served reliably and with much less latency. There is definitely an implementation in place to invalidate the regional cache from time to time and maintain the data freshness. As the search engine system creates inverted indexes, it assigns the score to each page to make sure relevant content is served to the users.

### Relevance of search results

For any search query, there can be hundreds of search results, and the search engine system should ensure that the results are in a sorted format with high-scoring web pages on top. Here are few factors that contribute to deciding the content relevancy of a web page:

- A web page is assigned a higher score if a lot of other web pages point to it. If some top domain adds the reference to the page as well, it becomes more relevant. For example, a research paper used as a reference on Stanford University’s site might hold more value than a research paper quoted on the sites of 10 lesser-known universities.
- The words in the web page title, the heading, a larger font, or any other special characteristics (e.g., embedded links, bold, italics, underlining, etc.) can be given more weight.
- The location of the web page adds to a score in the sense that a web page could be very relevant in the US but not so relevant in India.
- The search engine prioritizes positive content instead of negative content in top search results unless the search query explicitly evaluates to the negative content.

Many more attributes can be used to determine a page rank, but we’ll close the search engine discussion here and move on to launching the system on the AWS cloud.

# Launching the System on AWS

As we did in Chapter 14 , we’ll follow the policy of quickly setting up the application and choosing AWS services that require no or minimum expertise. Then, we’ll tackle issues as we understand more about how the overall system is functioning and the expectations of the users.

## Day 0 Architecture

The Day 0 architecture is based on an AWS blog post about scaling up a serverless web crawler and search engine. The entire process of the web crawler system can be broken down into a series of steps, and it essentially keeps repeating these steps until the list of URLs is crawled. To break the workflow into steps, AWS Step Functions (discussed in Chapter 12 ) is a great choice of service on the AWS cloud. Figure 15-9 shows the state machine representing how the web crawler downloads web pages.

[image: image]

###### Figure 15-9. State machine for web crawler implementation

All the states in the state machine can be executed as separate Lambda functions and use Step Functions map states for parallelization. There is also a requirement to store the URLs, which can be passed along between the states for evaluation, such as if the URL is already crawled or if there are more URLs to be crawled. Since the list of URLs is huge, it’s not possible to pass between the states using Step Functions alone—the system requires persistent storage. For database choices, the system doesn’t require any relations or strong consistency across the data, so a nonrelational service like Amazon DynamoDB or Amazon Keyspaces can be an ideal choice here. The system stores the available URLs and any related metadata and requires direct key operations on these URLs. We recommend using a database based on previous expertise here as neither of these two choices stands out clearly. For illustrative purposes, in this chapter we’ll use DynamoDB.

The system essentially requires two tables. One is a building block of the URL frontier system to store URLs and is used across the crawls. Another is created at the start of the state machine and deleted at the termination of the state machine; this table stores the URLs crawled during the ongoing crawl to ensure that a single URL is not crawled multiple times.

Once the web page is crawled by the crawler system, it needs a repository database to dump all the web page content. For such use cases, Amazon S3 is the preferred choice for storing the data, and it can be used in the second step of the architecture as a search engine to consume this data and index it. Building a custom search engine is a big task that requires an end-to-end thought process, but to deploy the system quickly, we can use Amazon Kendra, which we introduced very briefly in Chapter 13 .

Kendra is a fully managed service offering intelligent search capabilities. It is widely used as an enterprise search solution and is often targeted to build a custom search engine on top of internal documentation in multiple places, such as Slack, Google Drive, relational databases, Confluence docs, and so on. It offers connectors to connect with these different data sources and will automatically build a search solution on top of them. As the crawled web page data is stored to S3, the S3 connector can be used to configure S3 as a data source to Kendra. The entire architecture of the web crawler and search engine system after combining all these components is shown in Figure 15-10 .

[image: image]

###### Figure 15-10. Web crawler and search engine architecture

Interestingly, Kendra also offers a web crawler as a connector , so we won’t even require the web crawler part of the architecture. All we need to do is provide the seed URLs, and Kendra can crawl the websites and index them to support the search on top of that. Let’s now look at any limitations the system can face as it scales to serve more and more traffic.

## Scaling to Millions and Beyond

If you ignore infrastructure cost on the AWS cloud for a while, can you think of any limitations in the architecture explained in the previous section? Ideally, the architecture uses AWS serverless components, so the components should automatically scale up and down according to the nature of the traffic without any user interference.

Possible limitations include:

- AWS Step Functions can face higher latency and quota limitations. This was addressed by suggesting multiple Step Functions and usage of map states.
- AWS Lambda as a compute option scales automatically per the provided memory configurations. The cold start is not much of an issue because the system can survive a little lag, but we can still leverage a few of the options, such as provisioned capacity, to speed up the process of downloading web pages a little.
- Amazon DynamoDB is a fully managed service that scales indefinitely to support the storage requirements. One point of consideration here is the hard limit for RCU and WCU consumption on a single partition: it should exceed the limit of 1,000 WCUs and 3,000 RCUs or else the requests are throttled. The DynamoDB table is created with the partition key as a URL. Considering that one RCU is consumed for one request, the system can breach this limit if the following situation occurs: a URL is referenced in a lot of web pages, and the web crawler is working concurrently on more than 3,000 URLs. The positive side of this could be that even if the requests are throttled, we can assume the URL is already present in the DynamoDB table and safely skip it (the request was throttled because the partition is present in the DynamoDB). The problem that can surface is retrieval of additional attributes associated with a URL.
- We can consider latency as one parameter on URL retrieval from DynamoDB since there is no caching introduced in the system. Further, the system doesn’t store robots cache and DNS cache, which adds to the overall latency of calls to web servers.
- The web page content is stored in S3, which offers unlimited storage and automatically replicates the data for high availability, so there’s no bottleneck there.
- Amazon Kendra is a fully managed service, so we don’t control how data is stored or what capacity is offered to the customers. The service offers fixed capacity for storage and queries to the customers, and it can be further incremented with the help of AWS support. This control is often preferred at the customer’s end if the system needs to support a huge scale because that makes it easy to custom-build the software according to need.

If your system is operating at Google’s scale, or even one-tenth of this scale, it makes sense to manage the implementation on your own instead of relying on managed services like Kendra. This saves cost along with offering fine-tuned control over low-level configurations of the system.

###### Note

We’re not discouraging you from using AWS managed services—they are great and save a lot of time when building software without requiring any operational burden and expertise on your end. Evaluate your system architecture from time to time and deciding what works best for you.

In Day 0 architecture, we used Kendra to help with the search engine functionalities. Now, let’s figure out which microservices can replace Kendra (referencing the functionality from Figure 15-10 ) and build the architecture from the ground up:

Text-preprocessing service

This service takes care of text filtering and removes unwanted stop words, and it then creates a forward index with a relevant set of words. This is not a straightforward implementation of direct removal of words and can include multiple options to consider. For example, you can perform a Google search on entire sentences by entering them in double quotes (and to support these search queries, the system needs to index the entire sentence).

Inverted index creation service

This service is responsible for taking input as a forward index and creating an inverted index for the content. The inverted indexes are uploaded to S3 and downloaded by the inverted index reader service.

Inverted index reader service

This service downloads the inverted indexes and handles the read queries from the search keyword parser service.

Content relevance service

This service is responsible for hosting algorithms to get the most relevant content for given search keywords. There can be multiple services for content relevance, and each can work on different sets of criteria, such as geographical proximity or personal user interests.

Search keyword parser service

This service parses the user input into a set of keywords for further use by the content relevance service and inverted index reader service. The results are combined and returned to the frontend service.

Frontend service

This service takes actions on user requests, such as applying rate limiting and discarding unwanted traffic. It is essentially a gatekeeper service that forwards only actual traffic to backend services.

A lot of things can happen in the system, and the system should be resilient to handle the fault scenarios gracefully. You can build confidence by intentionally breaking the production environment on known parameters and seeing if the system can handle the faults. This practice is called chaos engineering : the discipline of experimenting on a system to build confidence in the system’s capability to withstand turbulent conditions in production. The experiment can be as simple as an EC2 instance being down; is it replaced by another one? In the AWS cloud environment, you could use AWS Fault Injection Service (FIS) . A lot of open source alternatives are also available for running these experiments.

Now, let’s incorporate all the components and complete the final architecture on AWS.

## Day N Architecture

You can definitely start with a single AWS account, but for Day N architecture, we recommend breaking the architecture into subcomponents with proper resource isolation—as we already did in the previous sections. To start, let’s assume there are two teams in the organization that independently own the web crawler and search engine systems (there can be more, such as teams that own ML initiatives, infrastructure management teams, or subteams for the web crawler and search engine systems). Both teams deploy their architectures into separate AWS accounts managed under the parent AWS account.

There are no strict guidelines for how many AWS accounts you should have. Different organizations take different approaches based on their requirements. For example, it is very common for organizations to have separate accounts for each microservice (and even different AWS accounts at the regional level for multiregion deployment of critical services), while some organizations keep a single AWS account to manage all the resources across the microservices. In Chapter 14 , we mentioned that having multiple AWS accounts can increase data-flow costs, but it simplifies certain other things, such as billing, complete resource isolation, and development flexibility for teams.

As in previous sections, we’ll now present the final architecture broken down into two subsystems, starting with the web crawler.

### Web crawler

Let’s revisit Figure 15-5 and figure out the AWS services and resources that can be used to deploy the suggested architecture on the AWS cloud, starting with the multiple databases used. The web crawler research papers suggest different data structure implementations to store and reference the data, though we’ll evaluate if existing storage options on AWS can suffice for the use case in Table 15-1 .

| Use case | AWS service | Comments |
|---|---|---|
| Seed URL | DynamoDB | The URL frontier system takes the URLs from this system to begin the crawling process. DynamoDB is a preferred choice because it maintains a direct mapping (key-value pair from the URL to additional metadata) with no requirements for data relationships and strong consistency over the database indexes. |
| URL storage and URL uniqueness | DynamoDB | This stores all the lists of the URLs that the system finds during the crawling of web pages. The URLs are added to this database after checking if they are not already present. |
| URL filter | DynamoDB | This database maintains the blocked URLs that the crawler system doesn’t want to crawl. |
| Robots cache | DynamoDB and/or ElastiCache | Both of these caching solutions help save time during the crawls. ElastiCache can be used alone as well as to improve the latency with disk persistence (to recover data in case of node failures). The robots cache helps the system figure out any exclusions on subsequent crawls even before crawling. The DNS cache maintains the IP address of the web server without making the round trip to the internet. |
| DNS cache | DynamoDB and/or ElastiCache |
| Webpage content | S3 and DynamoDB | S3 is an object storage solution that is a preferred choice for storing content like text files, images, videos, and the like, so we can use it to store the web pages. DynamoDB can store any metadata, such as URL-to-S3 file paths for web page content (which is helpful across the web page crawls). |

Implementing the URL frontier system requires queues for URL processing so that it can push URLs to the queues and they can be consumed by the web crawler system for further processing. We’ll leverage a combination of Amazon SQS and Amazon SNS for this purpose; Amazon MSK can be used for the same purpose as well. The URL frontier publishes URLs to a single SNS topic, and it can route subscribed SQS FIFO queues based on priority attributes in the message. The URL fetcher system requires an additional NAT gateway and internet gateway to communicate with the internet to retrieve the web pages.

The entire crawler processing is essentially a sequence of steps, and it makes sense to use a state machine such as AWS Step Functions or Amazon MWAA (discussed in Chapter 12 ) at a large scale as well. We can definitely build our own state machines, but using these AWS services helps us leverage the built-in debugging features along with the error-handling mechanisms. The web crawler system architecture fits an event-driven system well: a system completes its processing and announces the completion status; the other system takes this output as input and begins its processing and so on. We can also achieve this via an SNS-SQS architecture instead of Step Functions. We compared choreography and orchestration design patterns in Chapter 8 , and the same is applicable here: orchestration (AWS Step Functions) can be preferable to choreography (SQS-SNS) because of additional built-in features of AWS Step Functions, such as error handling and ease of debugging.

Selecting compute options is another important factor for application deployment, and we recommend taking the learnings from Chapter 11 for different types of compute. In short, there is no perfect answer, and we try to take a middle ground by choosing the Amazon EKS EC2 deployment option. We consider this a middle ground based on our previous experience with the technologies and traffic analysis or quota limits enforced by AWS. As in Chapter 14 , for better resource isolation we’ll deploy the microservices in different VPCs and use a separate Amazon EKS cluster for each of the microservices, as shown in Figure 15-11 .

[image: image]

###### Figure 15-11. Web crawler architecture

###### Note

AWS services for monitoring, managing access, and logging are not included in the architecture to keep the diagram less cluttered. Assume them as part of any architecture for overall observability.

As the web pages are ingested into the content storage system, the web crawler system notifies the search engine system about the new content. Upon receiving this notification, the search engine system begins its processing of the creation of indexes. We’ll discuss the AWS architecture of the search engine system next.

### Search engine

We described the high-level architecture of the search engine system in Figure 15-6 and microservices in “Scaling to Millions and Beyond” . We’ll go with a framework similar to the web crawler system for application deployment. For creating forward and inverted indexes, we won’t be relying on any of the AWS services, such as Amazon OpenSearch for search functionality; instead, we’ll create custom solutions following the guidelines laid out in “Designing the Search Engine” . Figures 15-12 and 15-13 illustrate the search engine system’s architecture on the AWS cloud.

[image: image]

###### Figure 15-12. Search engine architecture for inverted index creation

[image: A screenshot of a computer

Description automatically generated]

###### Figure 15-13. Search engine system for serving user queries

The content reader application reads the content from a repository stored by the web crawler system, performs preprocessing actions, and makes the content ready for forward index creation. We’ll use S3 to store large files like web pages and forward and inverted indexes and use them across the system. Amazon DynamoDB is used for any metadata storage requirements in the architecture. The forward index creator system constructs forward indexes using the output from the previous step, which is used as input to the inverted index creator system to construct inverted indexes.

The inverted index reader application downloads the inverted indexes created by the inverted index creator system and allows reads on top of them. The content relevance system consists of multiple applications to figure out the relevance of search results and can use services such as Amazon SageMaker for running any ML algorithms. The frontend system takes in user queries, preprocesses them with the help of the query parser system, and then returns results with the help of the relevance and reader systems.

# Conclusion

Web crawler and search engine systems are complex architectures and require a lot of iteration to crawl the web efficiently and present the most relevant search results to the users. Content relevance algorithms hold a very important place in search engines because users care about good search results only and nothing else. This is true for any system design—as long as we’re able to serve users in the best way possible, nothing else matters. Design decisions should include user inputs as concrete functional requirements.

Over the years, multiple papers have been published on distributed web crawlers and search engines, and we recommend reading them before implementing one of your own. This will help you avoid reinventing the wheel, and you can take inspiration from work that has already been done. We made some critical comparisons while choosing a technology for the system architecture, such as in-memory inverted indexes versus on-disk inverted indexes and using Amazon OpenSearch versus building custom solutions. Create a list of pros and cons mapping to your system requirements to finalize on a solution from all the available choices.

In the next chapter, we’ll take design decisions to architect a social networking system like Facebook or LinkedIn.

[image: ]

### System Design on AWS

Jayanth Kumar , Mandeep Singh
Published by O'Reilly Media, Inc.15% completeContent Progress 15% completedApprox. 16 hours left

1. Foreword queue 100% complete checkmark circle
2. Preface queue 100% complete checkmark circle
3. I. System Design Basics queue 100% complete checkmark circle
4. 1. System Design Trade-offs and Guidelines queue 54% complete
5. 2. Storage Types and Relational Stores queue 1% complete
6. 3. Nonrelational Stores queue 100% complete checkmark circle
7. 4. Caching Policies and Strategies queue 2% complete
8. 5. Load Balancing Approaches and Techniques queue 3% complete
9. 6. Communication Networks and Protocols queue 2% complete
10. 7. Containerization, Orchestration, and Deployments queue 2% complete
11. 8. Architectural Designs and Patterns queue 1% complete
12. II. Diving Deep into AWS Services queue
13. 9. AWS Network Services queue 2% complete
14. 10. AWS Storage Services queue 1% complete
15. 11. AWS Compute Services queue 3% complete
16. 12. AWS Messaging, Orchestration, Monitoring, and Access Management Services queue 100% complete checkmark circle
17. 13. Big Data, Analytics, and Machine Learning Services queue
18. III. System Design Use Cases queue
19. 14. Designing a URL Shortener Service queue
20. 15. Designing a Web Crawler and Search Engine queue System Requirements Show More Items Starting with the Design Show More Items Launching the System on AWS Show More Items Conclusion
21. 16. Designing a Social Network and Newsfeed System queue
22. 17. Designing an Online Game Leaderboard queue
23. 18. Designing a Hotel Reservation System queue
24. 19. Designing a Chat Application queue
25. 20. Designing a Video-Processing Pipeline for a Streaming Service queue
26. 21. Designing an Online Stock-Trading Platform queue
27. Index queue
28. About the Authors queue
