# Chapter 16. Designing a Social Network and Newsfeed System

Social network websites like Twitter (now X), Instagram, and LinkedIn have become vital parts of people’s lives, with most users utilizing them to share information with other people. This information, often referred to as a post on each platform, can be shared as text, images, videos, emojis, and more.

Social networking websites offer a variety of features, and we’ll specifically dig deeper into the design of the newsfeed (or user timeline —we’ll use both these terms interchangeably) component of the system. Newsfeed refers to the stream of posts and updates published by other users that a user typically sees as soon as they log into a social media app. Users can interact with these posts via emoji or text responses, or even by sharing the posts on their own feed. The newsfeed for each website can be derived based on different factors. We’ll start our discussion with the system requirements and then proceed to identifying system components to support these requirements. We’ll end the chapter with the potential architecture for our social network newsfeed system on the AWS cloud.

# System Requirements

Social networking websites offer a variety of features, such as posts that are shared (text, images, videos), a built-in chat messenger, user stories that typically expire in 24 hours, and more. Each feature can be an independent system—for example, the chat messenger, which we’ll discuss in Chapter 19 . For now, let’s dig into the functional and nonfunctional requirements of our newsfeed system.

## Functional and Nonfunctional Requirements

As mentioned before, social networking websites offer a lot of features, so we’ll limit the scope of the design to architect just some of these features for our site. The most important functional requirement in the context of this chapter is reflecting the newsfeed to the user. The newsfeed can be based on a single parameter or a combination of factors, including:

- All posts associated with a particular hashtag, topic, or location
- All posts published by the people a user is following
- All posts liked or shared by the people a user is following
- All posts derived based on a user’s past interests or assigned priority (for example, breaking news). This involves an ML component, so we’ll skip the details because of space constraints.

Our system will create a newsfeed for a user based on people and topics (or hashtags) that the user chooses to follow. We’ll also discuss hashtag-based storage and retrieval of posts (keyword-based search) to some extent in this chapter.

To support the newsfeed feature, the system should inherently support these functional requirements:

- A user onboards to the system and follows (or unfollows) people or topics based on personal interests.
- A user can make posts (for example, uploading photos in Instagram or posting a text-based post on X).
- APIs are exposed for retrieving data, which can be useful for monetizing the site. We won’t discuss this requirement in detail, but the idea is for developers to use APIs such as search with keywords or to be able to stream the data of all new posts to interested clients.

Here are the NFRs for the system:

- The system should be highly available and fault-tolerant to support all of the functional requirements.
- Eventual consistency is fine for reflecting posts in the newsfeed. There is acceptable lag between when posts are published by a user and when those posts are reflected in followers’ timelines.
- Keyword search requests should be fast and latency sensitive.

Let’s discuss the scale of the system next.

## System Scale

The number of users interacting with one another on social networking websites like X and Facebook is huge, and our system architecture should handle this increasing scale. Let’s make some assumptions about the scale the system needs to support, starting with the write traffic:

Number of new posts every second = 10,000

Photos uploaded every second = 800

Videos uploaded every second = 200

Average number of followers per user = 1,000

Maximum number of followers for a user account = 200 million

The read traffic is relatively large compared to the write traffic, so we’ll make these assumptions about the scale:

Number of monthly active users on platform = 500 million

User timeline retrieval every second = 100,000

User-interaction traffic, such as liking posts, can be huge; the numbers are in the millions per second. We’ll skip that storage-requirement calculation in this chapter; this can be calculated with scale numbers similar to how we handled it in the previous two chapters.

Now that we have finalized the requirements and have clarity on the scale we need to support, let’s begin our thought process by identifying key components of the system and presenting the overall picture of the system design.

# Starting with the Design

We’ll not go into depth on onboarding users to the platform as the onboarding system in the entire architecture basically takes care of this. A user onboards with their personal information and then starts following people and topics. Let’s talk a little bit about the storage of follower-following entities so as to ensure that the read queries become efficient. For example, if a user makes a post, that post should be sent to all the user’s followers; we need to ensure that the system can retrieve this follower list quickly and send notifications or populate user timelines.

Relationships between users can be established at multiple levels, not just one-to-one, such as friends of friends, locations, shared interests, and so on. For example, LinkedIn suggests people connections as first, second, and third degree: first degree represents people you’re directly connected with, second degree represents a mutual connection, and third degree represents all the user relationships apart from first and second degree. To manage these relationships among users, social networking websites generally leverage graph databases, which we discussed in Chapters 3 and 10 .

We’ll define a user graph service to manage the user relationships in a graph database. The user graph service can be used in real time by other services to retrieve user followings.

Now, let’s talk about the system architecture to handle new post ingestion (creation of new posts by users).

## Handling New Posts

The crux of social networking websites is users sharing information with other people. This helps define the goal of the user post service : store posts in such a way that they are sent to other users in near real time. Let’s reiterate the functional requirements of the system:

- Allow users to publish new posts and share them with people who are following them.
- Depending on country or company regulations, post validation is incorporated into the system. Validation can include no hate-speech content, not favoring any political agenda, input sanitization to avoid issues like SQL injection, and the like.

Instead of handling validation by the user post service, this responsibility can be given to a frontend service or the user gateway service . The user gateway service runs generic validations (not specific to underlying services) along with other functionalities, such as rate limiting, user authorization and authentication, and request blocking for bad actors.

The way that the user post service storage handles this depends on how the user timeline is built; it can be either a push or a pull mechanism:

Push mechanism

The user post service retrieves all followers of a user, builds their timelines, and stores them in a data store. As the user comes online, the user’s timeline can be served directly from the data store.

Pull mechanism

The user timeline is built in real time. As the user comes online, the system checks for new posts by people followed by the user and delivers them to the user’s timeline.

To decide on the approach that would be most beneficial, let’s consider two potential users: user A with 100 followers (a standard user) and user B with 100 million followers (a celebrity user). The push mechanism can work well for users who fall into the user A category, but this would be a lot of ingestion work for celebrity users. The complexity really adds up if the post is tagged with another celebrity or if one celebrity replies to another on the post (X reposts). The push approach makes writes complex (O( n ) operation where n is number of followers) in favor of optimizing reads (O(1) operation). The pull mechanism is preferred for celebrity users, and the posts are retrieved in real time while constructing the user timelines.

###### Note

It’s worth noting here that if a user follows a lot of celebrity users only and the user timeline is served directly from disk instead of a precomputed cache, then posts will take a relatively longer time to show up in the newsfeed. This is a little hit we can take on customer experience in favor of reducing system complexity. To improve customer experience, social networking websites save older data on the app itself, which is shown on the next visit with background sync in progress to retrieve the latest feed.

To make the best of both worlds, we can build a hybrid approach to serve both buckets of users. The user timeline is built consisting of all posts from normal users, and celebrity-user posts are appended in real time while retrieving the user timeline. Let’s talk about the steps in this hybrid architecture in some more detail:

1. A user with 10,000+ followers publishes a post with a unique post identifier, the post ID . The post ID is saved to a persistent database like MySQL. We touched on X’s Snowflake in Chapter 14 ; it can be used here to generate unique post IDs sorted by timestamp.
2. The user post service retrieves all the active follower user IDs from the user graph service to build a timeline in a cache data store for faster retrieval. The cache data store (Redis, for example) stores only the timelines for active users (such as those who last accessed the platform within the past 30 days) and to a certain limit (at the utmost, 30 posts, for example). The rest of the posts are served directly from the on-disk database, and the cache is updated accordingly.
3. The cache data store stores only the post IDs against the user IDs. The key-value structure could be something like the key as the user ID and the values as a list ( postId , postedBy , and postType ). The additional metadata associated with the post, such as the user’s profile picture, likes on the post, and replies associated with the post, can be served independently from a different cache or persistent storage.
4. The user timeline service can directly serve the results from the cache data store for active users and from the on-disk persistent database for inactive users (the cache is updated with the recent timeline once the user becomes active again).

Additional components might be involved here, such as ranking and sorting posts depending on the publishing time or user interests, embedding advertisements between posts, and much more. The user timeline service talks to different services (the user service for user information, the post service for post content, and the ranking service for post ranks) and delivers merged results to the user timeline.

Figure 16-1 captures the architecture of what happens behind the scenes when a new post is published by a user. We’ve introduced a post workflow orchestration component in the architecture, which is invoked by CDC events once the post is saved to the database and works in asynchronous mode. The orchestration component builds the user’s timeline in cache, and the same new post event can be consumed by the search service to offer search functionality on tags or keywords (more on this in later sections). X works on a similar architecture, which can be referenced from a high-level system diagram published by Elon Musk and the real-time delivery architecture presented at the QCon conference .

[image: image]

###### Figure 16-1. New post creation architecture

Let’s dig deeper into the database choice for the user post service.

### User post service databases

The user post service leverages two databases to store the post information: one for storing a post’s structured content (post ID, created by, media metadata) and the other for media content (images and videos). Object storage, such as S3, can be used for storing media content. There is a high probability that the same media is shared by multiple people, and the system should be optimized to handle duplicate content. A simple way to do this could be creating a hash for media content; any new media uploaded is checked against already uploaded media. We’ll talk more about this in Chapter 19 when we cover the chat application architecture. Another point of consideration is caching media content at edge locations (by leveraging solutions like Amazon CloudFront) to optimize downloads. This helps on two fronts: reducing calls to the user post service and reducing latency for media downloads.

Let’s explore both relational and nonrelational kinds of databases to serve the required use case. We can start by identifying the query patterns and expectations from the database engine, which should narrow down the choice. Table 16-1 lists both the read and write query patterns for the user post service.

| Write | Read |
|---|---|
| Store posts for a user | Read all posts by a user |
| Store comments against a post | Read all/paginated comments for a post |
| Store counters (number of likes, reshares) against a post | Get number of likes for a post |
| Store a list (user ID) of who liked the post; the like type can vary (smile, thumbs up, love, laughter) | Get a list of users who liked the post |

Both read and write queries are straightforward and can be satisfied by either database choice: a relational database like PostgreSQL (with sharding to support the scale) or a NoSQL database like Amazon DynamoDB or Amazon Keyspaces (compatible with Apache Cassandra). The data in DynamoDB should be stored in a way that makes the read queries efficient, as shown in Table 16-2 .

| Read query | Schema |
|---|---|
| Read all posts by a user | PK = u#{userId}#post SK = p#{postId} |
| Read all comments for a post | PK = p#{postId}#comments SK = c#{commentId} |
| Get number of likes for a post | PK = p#{postId}#likeCount SK = {count} |
| Get list of users who liked the post | PK = p#{postId}#likeList SK = u#{userId} |
| Get number of likes for a comment | PK = p#{postId}#c#{commentId}#likeCount SK = {count} |

If a user creates a large number of posts over time and we’re interested in only the most recent, the post ID should either be generated in Snowflake fashion, or it should include a timestamp in the sort key itself, similar to t#{epochTime}#p#{postId} if the post ID is a completely random identifier. Snowflake is our preferred approach because the system requires an implementation for generating unique post IDs at a huge scale.

###### Note

The size of data for a single partition in Amazon DynamoDB is limited to 10 GB, and the defined schema uses the user ID as a partition key. This means we’re assuming that the number of users won’t exceed this limit. The size of a single row is 0.5 KB (with a limit of 400 characters on the lengths of posts), so the maximum number of posts that a user can create is about 20 million.

We mentioned that relational databases, such as PostgreSQL, could also be used to store user posts, as shown in Figure 16-2 .

[image: image]

###### Figure 16-2. Relational database schema for user posts

The post_id column of the “post like users” and “comments” tables are referenced to the ID of the “posts” table. To support the query pattern of fetching all the comments against a post, an index can be created on post_id for fast retrieval. Considering the scale of the system, the database should be partitioned to support horizontal scaling. We need to figure out a key based on which data can be partitioned into multiple partitions. Consider partitioning logic in the database from the start, if feasible, even though there might not be a requirement for it. The data can be logically partitioned and moved to different physical partitions on a need basis.

For logical partitioning, we recommend a logic similar to how Redis has a hash slot implementation (discussed in Chapter 4 ). Instagram deploys a similar mechanism for ID generation and for managing logical and physical partitioning by leveraging PostgreSQL features. Another point to note here is that we might be using a relational database, but there is no requirement for strong consistency on features, like managing the number of likes or reflecting all the comments published on a post. These read queries can be eventually consistent to ensure optimal customer experience.

We mentioned the post workflow orchestration system responsible for fan-out of all posts to the followers and storing them in memory cache. Let’s discuss what goes on behind the scenes in this system and how it scales well for a large number of upcoming posts.

### Post workflow orchestration and memory cache

The post workflow orchestration is an async layer that comes into the picture once the post from a user is saved to a persistent database. We recommended Redis as a memory cache data store in Figure 16-1 to cache user timelines. Let’s evaluate more on the data store choice here.

Our primary reason for suggesting Redis is lower latency to serve user queries because data is stored in memory. Redis is faster when compared to any of the on-disk solutions, such as MySQL, Amazon DynamoDB, Cassandra, and the like, which makes it an ideal choice. Another point to note here is the data size requirement—it’s quite huge given the system scale numbers, and this can add to the cost. Is it worth considering databases like DynamoDB or Cassandra? DynamoDB offers automatic horizontal scaling and consistent single-digit millisecond latency at any scale, so it could be a good choice. The final answer to this dilemma is both yes and no, much like any other system design decision we make.

In the context of this chapter, we’ll rely on Redis in cluster mode to serve a timeline-caching use case. Revisit Chapter 4 to refresh your understanding of the Redis cluster architecture and how it helps with horizontal scaling with increasing data. We can leverage Redis’s list data structure commands like RPUSHX to always append the entry to the end of the list if the user ID is present in the list (cache only for active users), and LTRIM to keep a fixed-size list of post IDs.

Another point to note here with regard to the post workflow orchestrator is pushing the data to the Redis cluster. Assuming every user has an average of 1,000 followers and the system receives 100 posts per second, the number of calls to Redis becomes 100,000. However, the actual number of posts is much larger than 100, and the number of calls to Redis can become a bottleneck in terms of latency and I/O consumption. The ideal approach to solve this kind of problem is batching requests. Redis pipelining can be used to club multiple requests together, gain the benefits of request batching, and address this bottleneck. The bulk requests can be parallelized as well for further optimization.

Cache invalidation becomes important for any caching solution we might use. In case a user unfollows someone, the cache should be updated to remove the entry. This again should work in an asynchronous way: any changes in the graph service database are consumed by other components in the architecture and handled per the use case.

The memory cache is the first data store to look for to build a user timeline, so let’s discuss that more in the next section.

### User timeline service

Figure 16-3 captures the user timeline service, showing how it gathers data from different components in the architecture to build the user timeline. Memory cache is the first point of lookup for precomputed posts, and additional celebrity posts are retrieved from the user post service. The post ranking service helps with the final sorting and merging of results based on the rank. The query to the user graph service varies based on whether the user is active or not. For active users, the user graph service is queried only to retrieve celebrity users followed by the user, and for nonactive users, the entire list is retrieved and the timeline is built from the on-disk data store.

[image: image]

###### Figure 16-3. User timeline architecture

This architecture assumes that no real-time updates are sent to the user applications and that the timeline is updated upon the page refresh. For supporting the requirement of pushing new posts in real time to user timelines, we can explore persistent connections with the user devices. We’ll discuss persistent bidirectional connections in Chapter 19 when we look at the chat application architecture.

We talked about using graph databases for user connections, and we’ve built a basic understanding of graph databases in previous chapters of this book. Let’s dig a little deeper into the architecture of a user graph service and how it works at scale to store so many connections among the users.

## Managing User Connections

The base storage requirement is to manage the followers of each user, essentially managing relationships between the users. Relational databases like MySQL are typically a good choice, so you may be wondering why we recommended a graph database in previous sections. The reason is that the nature of the relations and complex queries need to be served in very low latency—for example, figuring out all the users who follow celebrity A and celebrity B and figuring out second-degree connections for LinkedIn (or mutual friends for Facebook). All of these use cases are well served by a graph database.

The responsibility of the user graph service is to manage all the relationships. We just mentioned a user-to-user connection relationship, but the relationship can be of any type. Taking the example of LinkedIn, here are a few relationships that can exist between different entities:

CONNECTED_TO 

User-to-user connections

WORKS_AT 

The user’s current organization

WORKED_AT 

The user’s past organizations

HAS_SKILL 

The user’s skill set

The user graph service exposes APIs to different services for managing any kind of relationships and publishes events for relationship updates that other services can act on.

Keyword or hashtag search is another functional requirement expected from the system. Let’s take a look at the search service for serving any search queries performed by the users.

## Search Service

What generally comes to mind when we hear the phrase “search use cases” is indexing : leveraging inverted index solutions like Elasticsearch to offer search functionality for types of keywords. Searching is a general functionality needed in most systems; we discussed searching in Chapter 15 while building a search engine, and we will return to it in Chapter 18 when we build a hotel reservation system.

As a reminder, here is the search functionality required by the social networking system:

- Retrieve all posts associated with a specific keyword or hashtag. The posts can be further sorted based on location, timestamp, user interests, and so on.
- Search media content (images and videos). In the backend, the system might be generating keywords when media is uploaded. The tags can be system generated or added by the users.

X uses an in-house solution called EarlyBird (an optimized Lucene index) to support searching. The search service aggregator gathers data from all the instances of EarlyBird matching to the search query. Pagination becomes essential for such use cases because the number of results matching a search query can be huge. We’ll discuss Elasticsearch optimal configurations like shard size in Chapter 18 ; the same strategy can be leveraged here to build a search system.

The use cases for searching are many, and there is a need to define the boundaries of what a system is built to support. For example, search for “breakfast recipes” in Instagram, and it presents different types of results in defined sections: “for you” (search results relevant for the user); account names with a breakfast item as the identifier; audio, or music associated with breakfast; tags, or keywords with a breakfast name; and places and reels targeted around “breakfast” as a keyword. Now notice that this search is very fast (along with offering you type-ahead search options), and all these results are rendered very quickly. The amount of data stored on Instagram servers is huge, so the indexing strategy should be quite efficient to power the search functionality at scale.

Figure 16-1 includes invocation of the search service upon any new post creation. The search service ingestor component ingests the data into an indexing data store, which is made available via read APIs ( search service aggregator ), as shown in Figure 16-4 . The media metadata extractor service is an ML component that extracts metadata from images and videos, such as image object (person, location, food item) and location properties if the location is included (location name and location type, such as ocean beach or mountains).

[image: image]

###### Figure 16-4. Search service

We’ll discuss the idea of GraphQL federations for the property search architecture in Chapter 18 ; a similar implementation can be applied here in the search service aggregator component. The search service aggregator retrieves the results from multiple available indexes based on the query and returns them to the users after ranking them based on relevancy.

With all these insights in mind, let’s move to deployment of these components on the AWS cloud.

# Launching the System on AWS

The most important consideration for deploying a social networking website is user interaction availability. We should consider how to ensure this when choosing any AWS service. We spent a good amount of time on building systems for handling new posts to make sure the user read paths are optimal. Another consideration for the nature of the system is eventually consistent behavior, giving us the ability to improve on cost and latency. We’ll start with the Day 0 architecture of the system and then try to scale for a larger user base.

## Day 0 Architecture

We’ll design a very basic system to support requirements like uploading of posts by users and ensuring that followers can see these posts in their timelines. The DynamoDB schema from Table 16-2 can be extended to include user information and followers, as shown in Table 16-3 .

| Query pattern | Schema |
|---|---|
| User information with counters (number of followers, following, posts) | PK = u#{userId} SK = count |
| User followers | PK = u#{userId}#followers SK = u#{followerUserId} |
| User following | PK = u#{userId}#following SK = u#{followingUserId} |

A single DynamoDB table serves our storage needs and supports all of the query patterns. We can build the keyword search functionality on top of DynamoDB by streaming the user post data to an Amazon OpenSearch cluster via DynamoDB streams, as shown in Figure 16-5 .

This architecture comprises multiple AWS Lambda functions to serve different use cases, as is evident from their names. The transformation Lambda converts DynamoDB data objects to an OpenSearch schema and makes them available for search. This doesn’t introduce a separate caching layer, but we can add that as and when required in the form of Amazon DAX or Amazon ElastiCache. We can use Amazon SNS and Amazon SES to deliver notifications to the users, and we can integrate monitoring tools like Amazon CloudWatch for application monitoring and issue debugging.

[image: image]

###### Figure 16-5. Social networking website Day 0 architecture

We skipped the analytics pipeline entirely in the Day 0 architecture; it could be helpful for running complex queries to derive data insights with tools like Amazon Redshift and Amazon QuickSight. The integration can be like data ingestion to an Amazon OpenSearch cluster; a separate Lambda can convert the data to a Redshift schema and save it to the cluster.

## Scaling to Millions and Beyond

The scale of social networking websites is huge, and delivering a fast, reliable user experience is of utmost importance. We’ll explore many considerations for scaling the architecture throughout the rest of this book, and we recommend taking learnings from all of them. We have already included scalable architecture as part of Figures 16-1 and 16-3 ; in this section, we’ll discuss scaling the architecture further on AWS. Let’s start with a few of the storage choices we have made previously in this chapter.

### Storage on DynamoDB

Table 16-3 shows the DynamoDB schema for storing a user’s information, such as the users that they are following and their followers. We introduced the concept of hot keys in “Amazon DynamoDB” in Chapter 10 and made some recommendations to resolve this issue. The suggested DynamoDB schema uses user ID as the partition key, meaning the following and followers data should fit into the limit of 10 GB per user. Some potential problems that can occur with scale, especially for celebrity users, include:

Partition storage limit

Assuming a storage requirement of 100 bytes for keeping a single follower’s data, a celebrity user can have approximately 107 million followers before breaching the 10 GB limit. Revisit Chapter 10 for recommendations on partitioning the data further for a partition that has already been created.

Read and write capacity limit

DynamoDB throttles the request if a partition has a hard limit of 3,000 RCUs or 1,000 WCUs (or both). The throttling can affect the read/write for count operations that we suggested for managing following and followers count in Table 16-3 . This can happen if the user’s followers increase or decrease in a spiky workload situation, such as a celebrity gaining popularity after a big endorsement or a falling out of favor due to a public backlash. The problem statement is similar to managing the number of likes for a post or the number of comments on a post. The guiding principle for serving this requirement is eventual consistency. Instead of direct writes to the table, the data should be persisted with a messaging queue in between, and reads should be served from the cache instead of directly hitting the table, as shown in Figure 16-6 .

[image: image]

###### Figure 16-6. Managing count at high volume

We’ve showcased the user post service in the context of managing the likes count, and a similar pattern is applicable for the number of followers. The write operation can be optimized further by batching multiple requests together; instead of incrementing the like count by one every time, multiple requests can be batched together and updated in one go, reducing database workload.

We discussed the push versus pull mechanism for celebrity users in the context of post creation in “Handling New Posts” . A similar design problem occurs for the comments published against a post at high scale.

### Scaling post comments

We’re fine with eventual consistency for the read paths, so the recommendation is comments served using memory cache and in paginated form. An important point to address is that when a user publishes a comment, they should see it with causal consistency, as discussed in Chapter 1 . The comment should not disappear due to eventual consistency; this could create confusion about whether it was successfully posted.

One way to address this problem is by handling this behavior in the frontend application (user app or web browser). The application makes an API call to the server for publishing a comment. Upon a successful API response, the comment is cached on the app itself and shown at the top. This is the simplest implementation for a smooth user experience, and a similar design is followed by the social media platforms for the user timeline. The application caches the content on local devices until the response is updated from the servers.

Skip the idea of handling it on the user app for a while—let’s think how this can be addressed at the database level. This discussion is important for making decisions in similar problems statements. So the issue is that the user should see a consistent view of data on the application. The simplest implementation is directing all the queries to the leader node where writes are happening (or specifying ConsistentRead as true in the DynamoDB API), but this increases the load on the database. A helpful idea in this situation is “read your write” consistency.

To achieve “read your write” consistency, the user should be tied to the leader node (or enable consistent reads for required operations) for the time being, depending on the time taken for the data replication in the database cluster. Synchronous replication is another way to ensure that all the database nodes have the same view, but it comes with a huge latency cost and is not recommended for write-heavy use cases.

Let’s also talk a little bit about reads. The ratio of content producers to consumers is very skewed; the scale of reads is exponentially high compared to the writes. Social platforms generally work on the principle of live comments, meaning that comments are pushed to user devices automatically without refreshing the app or web browser. To support this design, either a user device continuously polls for new updates or the server pushes the updates automatically. A poll-based approach can work at a smaller scale, but it can become a bottleneck with increasing scale. A continuous poll (it should be less than five seconds for near real-time behavior) can overload the backend servers and is not a recommended approach. A system with a push-based approach figures out which viewers are looking at the content and sends the updates to their devices.

The requirement is similar to group messaging for chat applications and is generally solved by managing persistent connections with users’ devices. We’ll dive deep into chat application design in Chapter 19 , with all the architectural nitty-gritty, but let’s discuss a shorter way to push comments to all the interested viewers for a particular post, illustrated in Figure 16-7 .

[image: image]

###### Figure 16-7. Pushing comments to all viewers

Once a comment is published by a user, it is saved locally in the regional database. There is asynchronous replication as well for database writes in one more region for data redundancy, which is discussed in “Multiregion deployments” . The comment is pushed to the queue for fanning out to all the regions. The regional deployment of the gateway service figures out all the users subscribed to a post and routes the comment to all the user devices.

The authentication and authorization system is another critical component for any system we design. Let’s discuss it in the context of scaling the system for millions of customers.

### Scaling the authentication system

We’ll specifically focus on AuthN and AuthZ and discuss Amazon Cognito scalability and whether it’s a good idea to use it at our proposed scale instead of developing a custom solution. We introduced Cognito’s offerings and related concepts in Chapter 12 , and see that chapter to get the most out of the comparison discussion here. The main idea behind choosing managed services such as Cognito is removing the entire development and operational burden from your plate and letting AWS manage the service end to end.

Security solutions are hard to build and require expertise to build them right because even though the application is operating at a lower scale, you can’t compromise on customers’ personal data. Table 16-4 compares various aspects of Cognito and a custom authentication service.

| Comparison aspect | Amazon Cognito | Custom solution |
|---|---|---|
| Security features | Cognito comes with multiple features for AuthN and AuthZ, as discussed in Chapter 12 . | Cognito allows customization to a great extent, but you still don’t have end-to-end flexibility over how the system works internally. |
| Security expertise | Building solutions to secure your systems takes expertise, and Cognito helps take that off your plate. You don’t have to worry about security features and scalability; you can simply focus on the business logic of the software. | Custom solutions require security expertise to build an end-to-end solution. If there is a limitation to using Cognito in any of the aspects, there is an option to build the auth application by self-hosting open source software like Keycloak and amending the code per custom needs. |
| Operations: managing compute and storage | Cognito scales automatically as needed, and no user intervention is required. | The custom solution requires proper scaling strategies as the business grows. |
| Compliance regulations, such as HIPAA and PCI DSS | Cognito is compliant with these standards. | The compliance requirements need to be inherently built in custom solutions. While Cognito supports multiple compliance regulations, if any country compliance isn’t supported, then custom solutions make more sense. |
| Multiregion availability | Cognito doesn’t offer multiregion support out of the box, which adds extra overhead at the customer’s end for managing multiregion users. | Custom solutions can be deployed or replicated across the required regions as needed. |
| Integration with AWS services | Cognito makes it very easy to integrate with other AWS services, such as Amazon API Gateway and AWS ALB. | Integration requires additional effort for a custom solution. |
| Migration to another cloud provider, going entirely on-premises, or migrating to a different auth service | Migration can be very tricky with cloud-specific auth solutions. The migration requires figuring out the auth service in another cloud, and it’s often a major headache to migrate existing users to a new cloud. Cognito doesn’t allow export of user passwords and becomes a bottleneck in migration (you can get around it by authenticating a user via Cognito and forcing them to reset the password; this can work well with active users but is not straightforward for inactive users). | A custom application is easy to migrate to different clouds as long as the compute and storage solutions are cloud agnostic. The extra effort is needed only in situations like moving from Amazon DynamoDB in the AWS cloud to Spanner in the Google cloud . |

Go through this comparison and identify which aspects best match your needs.

Session management is one of the features we require so that the user doesn’t have to go through authentication flow again and again. JWTs are a way to make session management easier. The idea is that once a user is authenticated by the system, subsequent calls to the system should not require AuthN and AuthZ to speed up the operations (depending on the system architecture, authentication might require talking to an auth service or performing a database lookup to validate the user credentials). JWTs allow users to create a token once they are authenticated for the first time. Subsequent calls to the system are required to pass on this token, and the system validates the user based on this token. This operation is done in memory of the application servers and speeds up the API operations; the API can skip the authorization against specific resources and just focus on executing application logic.

This looks great, but there is no such thing as a free lunch, so what’s the catch? The catch is the token expiration time: assume the token expiration is set to five minutes, but the user logs out within one minute. In these scenarios, the token can be misused by man-in-the-middle attacks for the next four minutes, opening the system to security threats. Redis has documented this potential threat in its engineering blog and recommends using traditional database lookups for user authentication and limiting JWT to service-to-service communications.

We know we keep repeating the phrase “It depends on the business use case,” but this holds true here as well. Evaluate the requirements of the system and not blindly settling on any technology. For example, don’t assume JWT is a bad choice after reading the previous paragraph; every technology has pros and cons.

We have talked about building Day 0 and Day N architecture in all the chapters in Part III thus far, but this comes with migration effort, so let’s discuss a few strategies for planning this better.

### Moving from Day 0 to Day N

As companies grow over time, their engineering teams create optimizations on top of existing software or develop new software altogether to support the scale and system features. This should be evaluated from time and time and can heavily depend on the business use case you’re trying to solve. Social networking giants like X and Facebook have built multiple technologies to support scale and have made some of them open source. See the documentation of these software applications (refer to the engineering blogs of the companies) to understand the problem statement and solution and gain a deeper understanding of different components in the architecture.

For example, X has developed FlockDB for distributed graph storage, Gizzard for managing data partitioning, and Manhattan as a multitenant distributed graph database. Similarly, Facebook has developed Unicorn for searching trillions of edges in the social graph (Instagram uses Unicorn to power the search infrastructure ) and Haystack as object storage for multimedia content, and it has optimized Memcached for caching at Facebook scale. You can find similar innovations from other companies as well. For example, LinkedIn built its in-house graph database called LIquid to support multidegree connections.

Once an improved system is built, the traffic should be seamlessly transitioned to this new system without affecting end users. The strategy of migration can vary depending on multiple factors, such as the following:

- Migration happens with downtime, and the application is not available in a certain time window. The migration process becomes much more complex if it should be completed without any downtime.
- Whether the system is stateless or stateful: stateless systems are relatively easier to migrate as there is no state saved on the server instance and it is maintained in a database on a different hardware machine. Stateful systems maintain a backend system and database on a single hardware machine. We’ll discuss an example of a stateful system in Chapter 19 .

Let’s discuss different strategies we can follow for smooth migration.

#### Traffic replication on the new system

We need a mechanism for gaining confidence in the working of the new system, and the best way is to put this system to work. The work for the system is serving actual production traffic. Once developer or quality assurance testing is completed, the system should be tested against real production traffic, as shown in Figure 16-8 .

[image: image]

###### Figure 16-8. Traffic replication on a new system

The existing system both processes the request and forwards the same request to the new system. The response analysis pipeline compares these two responses and generates metrics for verification. To ensure the same process can be leveraged by other teams in the organization, we can create a separate service component responsible for replaying the traffic to the new system and verify the results.

Note that the customers are still served by the existing system; the new system is just working in parallel for confidence. To start, the new system is exposed to a portion of the production system and is gradually scaled for all the production traffic. Any issues encountered are fixed along the way.

#### Actual system migration

Once we’re sure the new system is working as expected, we can expose the new system to serve the actual production traffic. This is again done in stages to ensure smooth migration; a strategy for user-facing applications is shown in Figure 16-9 .

[image: image]

###### Figure 16-9. Rollout strategy for a user-facing application

A/B testing is a popular strategy that works in a similar fashion. You design experiments and divide the traffic accordingly based on traffic division logic; one such logic is shown in Figure 16-8 .

Once the application works well with a limited set of user groups, we can move to a percentage-wise rollout. We can start with as little as 1% of the traffic and gradually move to 10%, 30%, 50%, and so on. After a 100% rollout of the new system, we recommend letting it run for about two weeks and then deciding when to turn off the old system.

Migration is a relatively easier process if no database migration is involved, but if this is not the case, let’s discuss some recommendations to handle that.

#### Database migration

Database migration can involve moving from an older data model to a newer data model on the same database engine or a data-model upgrade and a change of database engine, such as moving from PostgreSQL to DynamoDB.

Here are a few tips for a smooth database migration:

- The older data needs to be moved to a newer database model. This can be done by offline batch loads using a transformation layer, which converts older model data to newer model data.
- During the migration window, the system should follow a dual write strategy. This means the data should be written to both databases.
- The read strategy is also dual. This means the system reads data from both the databases. An extra verification layer can be added that compares the data from both databases for validation. This holds true if the database migration is only involved within the same system; if there is an entirely new architecture with a different database, the verification can happen at the API request level, as discussed in previous sections.

The last step for any type of migration is clearing up the old resources. The old architecture should be tiered down to remove any operational burden and save the cost of unused resources.

## Day N Architecture

The scope of building a user timeline can grow over time and can include additional posts based on interests, location, or any other particular parameters. The primary requirement for building a timeline is to show all posts from the people a user is following, and additional components can be added as the system evolves. The Day N architecture based on all the discussion in this chapter is presented in Figure 16-10 .

We skipped Amazon CloudFront in the architecture diagram for simplification, but the idea is to serve media content from a CDN instead of downloading it directly from the S3 bucket. We’ll discuss multiple content distribution strategies as part of Chapter 20 . We touched on the orchestration component in Chapter 15 , and we can use the same reference here.

We should identify the critical components of the system for operating and for serving the users; ranking the posts at user level or adding more posts are extras that we’re building to keep users engaged. Let’s elaborate more on this idea and how it can help achieve high availability for the systems in the overall architecture.

[image: image]

###### Figure 16-10. Day N architecture

### High availability of system

In case of any unforeseen instances, such as cloud provider services going down or increased load due to a retry storm with newly introduced code, the system architecture should ensure that end users are least impacted. We should perform multiple levels of testing from time to time to ensure that the issues are identified beforehand, but let’s discuss some recommendations for how to plan better if this situation does occur.

The first recommendation involves identifying the criticality of the application. All the subsystems in the architecture are assigned a certain level of priority; for example Amazon follows a tier structure: Tier 1 means a highly critical system with direct impact on the customer, Tier 2 means a medium-critical system with medium impact (for example, an order is delayed by one day but is still delivered), and Tier 3 means a low-critical system that provides an add-on experience. This division helps Amazon focus only on Tier 1 systems in case of downtime and further makes it mandatory for these systems to go through extra steps of testing before any new changes are made live.

Another suggestion in the same vein involves identifying requests that need to be processed based on priority and dropping nonpriority requests. Let’s take an example from Netflix’s systems . Two types of requests are sent to the API gateway: playback requests and telemetry requests. Telemetry requests send the health metrics from the user devices, which are helpful for improving the user experience, but playback requests are most critical because they serve the content. Based on the health metrics, a system state can be identified beforehand, and the gateway drops the request instead of building up the request queue of the system.

An important consideration for large systems is deployment across regions. Let’s discuss multiregion deployments in more detail.

### Multiregion deployments

Managing an application on such a large scale comes with a lot of challenges, and expanding the application to multiple regions brings a new set of issues. There can be different reasons why companies choose this kind of deployment strategy:

- Following compliance regulations, where the data of one country’s users should reside in the same country’s data center
- Increasing application resiliency so that the service operates without disruptions even if a cloud region goes down entirely
- Bringing applications nearer to the end users so that requests can be served faster

Let’s assume the application is deployed in two AWS regions, and both serve the customer traffic depending on the geolocation of the customer. If one of the region’s services are impacted, the traffic is shifted to the functional region, and the customer experience is not affected, as shown in Figure 16-11 .

[image: image]

###### Figure 16-11. Traffic switch upon region failure

Here are a few important considerations for service deployment in multiple regions:

- Both regions are completely functional and can independently serve the customer traffic. There are no common services between the regions.
- The services are stateless, and the state is maintained only at the database layer. The information stored in the databases is continuously replicated to another region asynchronously (because user requests should not be affected due to replication lag). Either the database replication is inherently supported by the database, such as with DynamoDB global tables and the global data store for ElastiCache Redis , or you should implement it on your own if support is not available in the database.
- Service deployments across the regions should be in sync with automation as much as possible. Additionally, consider keeping a buffer window between the same deployment on multiple regions. This helps identify any issues in one region before changes are propagated to another region.

In the scenario of region downtime, traffic should be shifted to another region, as shown in Figure 16-11 . We recommend shifting this traffic gradually rather than in one go to avoid disruptions in another region due to increased traffic. The thundering herd problem can arise if all the clients switch to another region at the same time. Random jitter should be introduced in the client devices for API invocation to the server.

Serving some users is better than serving none. For region failures, consider a load-shedding strategy to drop a percentage of requests to manage the load on a single region. The systems can eventually be scaled in the single region to serve all the traffic.

# Conclusion

Along with identifying system requirements and boundaries, it is very important to figure out user behavior and traffic patterns for how users interact with the platform. Our social networking system has two kinds of users—normal users with fewer followers and celebrity users with followers in the millions—and we segregated these two types for optimal design when building the user timeline.

We also surfaced multiple examples of systems, starting with a simple architecture and then moving to a more complex one as new requirements come up or as the system scales for more users. One such example is managing the user relationships in databases like MySQL and later moving to a graph database to optimally figure out indirect relationships (such as the second-degree connections in LinkedIn). The same analogy applies to choosing a cloud provider service versus building the entire service on your own, as we described in our comparison of Cognito and a custom authentication solution.

In the next chapter, we’ll explore the design of another real-time system: an online gaming leadership board in multiplayer games. This chapter will introduce you to concepts around designing low-latency systems with multiple concurrent users playing at the same time.

[image: ]

### System Design on AWS

Jayanth Kumar , Mandeep Singh
Published by O'Reilly Media, Inc.15% completeContent Progress 15% completedApprox. 16 hours left

1. Foreword queue 100% complete checkmark circle
2. Preface queue 100% complete checkmark circle
3. I. System Design Basics queue 100% complete checkmark circle
4. 1. System Design Trade-offs and Guidelines queue 54% complete
5. 2. Storage Types and Relational Stores queue 1% complete
6. 3. Nonrelational Stores queue 100% complete checkmark circle
7. 4. Caching Policies and Strategies queue 2% complete
8. 5. Load Balancing Approaches and Techniques queue 3% complete
9. 6. Communication Networks and Protocols queue 2% complete
10. 7. Containerization, Orchestration, and Deployments queue 2% complete
11. 8. Architectural Designs and Patterns queue 1% complete
12. II. Diving Deep into AWS Services queue
13. 9. AWS Network Services queue 2% complete
14. 10. AWS Storage Services queue 1% complete
15. 11. AWS Compute Services queue 3% complete
16. 12. AWS Messaging, Orchestration, Monitoring, and Access Management Services queue 100% complete checkmark circle
17. 13. Big Data, Analytics, and Machine Learning Services queue
18. III. System Design Use Cases queue
19. 14. Designing a URL Shortener Service queue
20. 15. Designing a Web Crawler and Search Engine queue
21. 16. Designing a Social Network and Newsfeed System queue System Requirements Show More Items Starting with the Design Show More Items Launching the System on AWS Show More Items Conclusion
22. 17. Designing an Online Game Leaderboard queue
23. 18. Designing a Hotel Reservation System queue
24. 19. Designing a Chat Application queue
25. 20. Designing a Video-Processing Pipeline for a Streaming Service queue
26. 21. Designing an Online Stock-Trading Platform queue
27. Index queue
28. About the Authors queue
