# Chapter 19. Designing a Chat Application

In Chapter 6 , we explored multiple networking protocols and communication mechanisms for building near real-time messaging platforms. Messaging applications are widely used across the globe. The application can be standalone, such as WhatsApp or Telegram, or it can be integrated as a feature inside social networking apps like LinkedIn or Instagram. In this chapter, we’ll learn how to design large-scale messaging applications to offer fast communication in near real time. We’ll also discuss the underlying architecture of WhatsApp messenger, which serves a huge number of concurrent users. Let’s begin with the system requirements of a chat application.

# System Requirements

A messaging application can support a wide variety of features, but to keep it simple, we will choose to build a limited set of functionalities and skip features like voice and video calling. Let’s finalize the requirements to answer these questions:

What kinds of communication are supported by the application? 

The application offers one-to-one messaging, group messaging, and broadcast messaging. A broadcast is different from group messaging in that only a subset of users can send messages in the broadcast channel.

What type of content will be supported by the application? 

The application allows users to share text messages, images, videos, and documents. The next question that arises is whether there is a limit to the video file size. To avoid large media uploads, the system limits the file size to 100 MB.

Does the application store all the messages on its end, or are messages deleted once they are delivered to the users? 

We’ll build a system like WhatsApp that can delete the messages from the server once the messages are delivered to the users.

Will the system include read receipts? 

Reflecting the user last seen and read receipts for any messages sent is a good feature to have. The read receipts can include messages sent to the application server, delivered to the user, and read by the user.

Does the system support end-to-end encryption of messages? 

Encryption ensures that the messages can be read only by the sender and the receiver, which maintains their security. We’ll skip the implementation details of encryption support, but the system will not be limited in any way from offering this support in the future.

Is there a limit on the number of members in a group or for message broadcasts? 

We’ll limit the system to 1,024 members for a group and for broadcast messages. In broadcast channels, only people with admin access can message, and the rest of the group can only view the message. We’re not imposing any limits on the number of people who can be admins—note that if everyone is an admin, then the broadcast channel essentially behaves as a group.

Does the application support features apart from messaging, such as voice calls, video calls, or sharing status updates (like Instagram stories) with the users? 

The application focuses just on the chat functionality and doesn’t support any extra features.

Let’s turn to the functional and nonfunctional requirements of the system.

## Functional and Nonfunctional Requirements

The functional features supported by the chat application are:

- The application supports one-to-one, group, and broadcast messages.
- Text, images, videos, and documents are supported as media types for communication among the users.
- A user should be able to see active status (online/offline) and last seen of any person from their contacts.
- Read receipts should be shown for sent, delivered, and read messages.
- There are push notifications on users’ mobile devices for their received messages.

Let’s discuss the NFRs next:

- The communication should be near real time with minimum possible latency.
- The system should be highly available and able to operate at increasing scale.
- The system should be able to store chat messages until they are delivered to recipients.

We’ll make some assumptions and try to come up with an expected scale for the system in the next section.

## System Scale

For the scale that needs to be supported by the system, we can make assumptions based on the scale served by the WhatsApp chat application:

Number of monthly active users = 3 billion

Messages sent = 100 billion/day = 1.2 million/second

Text, images, videos sent every day = 90 billion text, 8 billion images, 2 billion videos

The chat application supports both one-to-one and group messaging. The write-to read-ratio is approximately 1:1 for direct messaging between two users, and it will be skewed in the case of group messaging. There are no stats available for the number of groups on the WhatsApp platform, so let’s take a rough number of one billion. There are generally very few active users sending messages in the groups, and the remaining users are readers only; a good assumption for the read-to-write ratio is 90:10.

The numbers indicate the large number of concurrent users that the system is required to handle, and the system should be horizontally scalable to work without hiccups for peak overloads. The number of connections that a single server can handle highly depends on the choice of implementation and should be figured out with proper load testing. We’ll go into more detail on the implementation next.

# Starting with the Design

In a very simplistic view of a chat application, a user sends a message to the chat server with the intended recipient, and the chat server delivers this message to the receiver as shown in Figure 19-1 . The chat message might be intermittently stored in the database in case the user is not connected to the internet.

The first step before communication can begin between users is registering the user and determining who they can send messages to. This can completely vary from use case to use case; for example, you need a person’s registered phone number for communication over WhatsApp and an Instagram handle for communication over Instagram. Here, we’ll take our cues from WhatsApp and use the phone number as a unique identifier for user registration. The user is verified via a phone number, and reregistration is required if their phone number changes. The user service can be responsible for registering a user and later for authentication of the user to send and receive messages.

[image: image]

###### Figure 19-1. High-level overview of chat application

Now, let’s look at the messaging architecture and figure out details like optimal networking protocol and message storage selection.

## Messaging Architecture

A very important requirement for messaging systems is near real-time behavior: the communication should be instant, as if two people are talking face-to-face. To support this, it is critical to identify the networking protocol (or technology). Some popular protocols are XMPP and MQTT. Refer to Chapter 6 for the architectural details of these protocols. Let’s try to figure out the benefits associated with each of these protocols.

### Protocol selection

Based on the discussion from Chapter 6 , the chat system requires implementation of WebSockets for maintaining a persistent connection between the users and the chat servers. The other mechanisms for retrieving new messages (such as polling) from the chat server are latency and resource-intensive operations (see “Scaling post comments” in Chapter 16 ). Since a persistent connection is maintained, the protocol must be lightweight to ensure that resource consumption by devices is minimum (saving internet usage and battery life).

###### Note

Another important point to consider for fast messaging over the network is message payload size, which can heavily depend on the data format. The payload in JSON format can be bulky; one solution to reduce it could be data compression, and another involves using data formats like Thrift or Protocol Buffers (Protobuf).

Assume a user connects to the internet and the chat application establishes a connection with the chat server over HTTPS. There can be two possible approaches here:

- The first call pulls all the user’s messages since they were last online and then establishes a persistent bidirectional connection to receive any delta updates.
- The first call registers the user on the chat server, and then all messages (since they were offline or new messages) are sent over a persistent bidirectional connection .

Both the MQTT and XMPP protocols are widely used by different messaging applications to support a large scale of users: MQTT is used by Facebook Messenger, and XMPP is used by WhatsApp. XMPP is inherently built to support messaging, and MQTT is built especially for machine-to-machine communication in resource-constrained environments. Both protocols are lightweight, but MQTT is relatively lighter and operates on the transport layer. XMPP is more feature rich in terms of messaging architecture as compared to MQTT but requires more resources for operating.

There is also the option of not using either XMPP or MQTT but instead relying on a pure WebSocket connection over HTTPS between the client devices and the server. This will definitely introduce additional work on the system’s end, which could have been inherently supported by a particular protocol, such as user presence information in the case of XMPP. These protocols can also work with persistent connections, and it is a good idea to use them in order to gain their inherent properties and build on top of them. We’ll now try to figure out the system architectural details for building one-to-one chat functionality.

### Direct messaging

In the previous section, we mentioned keeping a bidirectional persistent connection between the user and the chat application server. For a user to send a message to another user, the system should be able to figure out which particular server (from the pool of servers) holds the connection for that user. Message delivery from user A to user B can be completed in this series of steps, shown in Figure 19-2 :

1. User A sends a connection request to the chat frontend service once the device is online.
2. The chat frontend service authenticates the user by forwarding the request to the user service.
3. The system establishes a persistent connection with the user device and stores an entry in the database of the server ID assigned to the user device.
4. Steps 1 and 2 occur for user B.
5. User A sends a message to the chat frontend service with user B as the intended recipient.
6. The system checks for the server ID assigned to user B from the database in case user B is online and sends the message to user B’s device.
7. Once the message is delivered to user B’s device, the system sends an acknowledgment over the same persistent bidirectional connection, which is forwarded to user A’s device. The message-read acknowledgment works in the same way.

[image: image]

###### Figure 19-2. Direct messaging between two users

When both users who are communicating are online, there is no requirement for message storage, and the message can be delivered directly to the intended recipient. In case the recipient is offline, the system maintains an independent offline component to store the messages for the time being. The database of user IDs to server IDs also includes information noting if the user is online or when the user was last active. This can be served with a simple key-value database, such as Amazon DynamoDB or Amazon ElastiCache with Redis storing metadata information for users, as shown in Figure 19-3 . In a nutshell, we need a connection management mechanism for a very high number of concurrent users and to figure out a way to manage the users to different servers efficiently.

[image: image]

###### Figure 19-3. Connection user pool management service

###### Note

The system should be able to handle network interruptions. Let’s say the internet is jittery, which causes the connection with the server to drop intermittently. This can lead to continuous fluctuation of a user’s presence status between online and offline. The system can handle this via periodic heartbeats at a fixed interval with the user device to make sure the device is still connected with the chat server.

The user connection should be managed by a thread or process on the running server, and to ensure a single server can support a huge number of connections, the process/thread should be lightweight. The OS processes are not really lightweight, so we’ll explore some alternatives on top of them to help with this implementation in the system architecture.

The actor model is a conceptual model proposed to support large numbers of connections concurrently with minimal resources. The actor model can be inherently supported by the programming language, or we can use available frameworks or libraries built for the programming language. We’ll talk about the Erlang programming language with support for the actor model as Erlang processes in the “WhatsApp Architecture” section . There are similar implementations in other languages, such as goroutines in Go , coroutines in Kotlin , and virtual threads in Java .

The actor model can be helpful for managing a large number of user connections. Akka is one of the actor model implementations for the Java and Scala programming languages, and Play framework is a utility that can be used to manage implementation of the Akka actor model with WebSockets to facilitate the messaging functionality. Using these frameworks in software programs helps us build the applications on top of the actor model and reduces our work since we don’t have to build everything from scratch.

Here are the characteristics of the actor model:

- An actor is a very small object and acts as a fundamental unit of computation in the system.
- Each actor is isolated and doesn’t share memory with other actors. This feature helps with managing the concurrent connections very easily without a requirement of explicit locking for resources.
- Each actor has a designated mailbox (FIFO queue) to receive messages from other actors that serves as a communication channel between the actors.
- An actor is associated with a state and behavior. The behavior defines the state modification logic upon receiving a new message.
- Actors are completely decoupled to work asynchronously and handle one message at a time. To perform the required work, an actor is assigned a lightweight thread to modify the state based on behavior definition from the message. The great thing about this architectural pattern is that threads are not blocked for the entire request execution (as in synchronous systems). The thread is free as soon as work by the actor is complete, and the thread can be assigned to other actors. This allows the system to create a lot more actors (with the same hardware configurations) and execute them with fewer threads, optimizing the overall resource utilization of the system.
- An actor can create child actors and supervise them with the operation (act as a supervisor actor). The supervision handles failures at the topmost layer in case work being executed fails for some reason.

The ratio of the number of actors to threads can vary by a huge proportion on a single machine. In reference to the chat application architecture, each actor is responsible for holding one persistent connection with a user device, but a thread is assigned to the actor only when a message is being sent to the device. The first connection between users is established as a simple HTTPS call from the user device, and then it is converted to persistent connection. The chat frontend service stores the configuration of which particular instance is being assigned to the user from the pool.

A machine may go down while it’s managing the user connections. There should be an efficient mechanism to reestablish the connection with user devices without having much impact on the chat application and user experience. This requires spawning a new machine, reestablishing user connections, and updating the user mapping database with a new instance. The establishment of a new connection can be built inside the client application to check for the persistent connection (in case the device is connected to the internet), and if the connection is dropped, the client can initiate a new connection with the server, and the server accordingly reassigns a new actor on a machine and updates the user mapping database.

The one-to-one message functionality can be extended to group and broadcast messages with one difference: the chat frontend service forwards the message request from the user to the group service, and then this service fans out the messages to the group members. In case some users from the group are not available, messages should be kept in the transient storage until the users come back online.

###### Note

The system doesn’t continuously check for a user’s online status; rather, it relies on the user’s initial ping to establish connection. Upon establishing the first connection, the system checks for any new messages from when the user was offline and delivers them if there’s anything present in the database.

Let’s move on to discuss our data store requirements for storing messages and multimedia for offline users.

### Message storage

The system supports text, image, and video formats. An object storage data store such as Amazon S3 is a good choice for storing large media files like images, videos, or any other types of documents. For text messaging and references to media files, we can use more structured databases, such as RDBMS or any NoSQL solution. The requirements for the database are simple:

- Store messages in such a way that they can be retrieved once the user is connected to the chat servers. This should serve all kinds of messaging: one-to-one, group, and broadcast.
- Messages should be stored with acknowledgment receipts until the messages are seen by the recipient.

The data should be stored in the database in such a way that the reads are very fast, meaning the system should be able to retrieve all the direct, group, and broadcast chats for a user in the minimum time possible. The storage requirements can be met by both relational databases and NoSQL solutions, such as Amazon DynamoDB. We can identify relationships among the data, such as a message is associated with a user or group, a user can be part of one or more groups, a user is registered with a device, a user has a list of contacts, and so on. Both relational and NoSQL databases meet the storage requirements since the system doesn’t require any specific set of constraints offered by a particular database.

One system requirement is deleting messages from the database once they are successfully delivered to users. The choice of database should be able to efficiently perform the deletion process. As pointed out in Chapter 18 , data is not actually removed from the disk upon the delete operation but rather is cleaned with the help of regular vacuum processes. To manage the deletion process more effectively, we can try to figure out if data can be partitioned based on the time range so that the entire set of older data can be removed by deleting the partition. The key consideration for the chat application use case could be deleting the data at regular intervals, such as on a weekly or monthly basis, rather than firing the delete query for every message once it is delivered to the user. The deletion process should also take care of deleting unwanted media from the object storage. WhatsApp follows a rather simple architecture for transient message storage using the files—we’ll discuss this approach in later sections of this chapter.

The message storage aspect is quite interesting in the case of group messaging. We mentioned that the system stores a copy of messages associated with a user and the user can fetch these messages once they are online, but is this really a requirement for group messaging? Keeping a copy of the same message for each user is overkill and requires much more storage space. Instead, the system should keep a single copy of a message in the context of a group, and the message ID (the unique identifier of the message) can be used as a reference for message sharing, much like media sharing. This consideration becomes critical if the messages are stored on the server forever, but the system proposed in this chapter can still live with it as the messages are stored only for the time that the users are not connected to the chat application.

Now, let’s discuss multimedia management in the chat application.

### Multimedia system

The chat application supports image and video sharing along with texts. This can be managed by a completely independent component (a media service) to upload and download the media content, and the reference URL of the media can be used as part of messaging. For any request to share media content, the request is sent to the media service, and it returns a reference URL for where the image is uploaded (the same reference URL is used by recipients to download the media content). The reference URL is sent via text messaging following the same principles we discussed in “Direct messaging” .

Additionally, the media content is pushed to CDNs for faster downloads. On big events like sports events or holidays, it can absolutely happen that the same media content is forwarded by a wide range of users, and storing the content again and again requires a lot of storage space. Media compression is the first technique for saving storage space on devices and allows for faster download and uploads. The compression should not reduce the media quality drastically, and a balance should be kept between saving storage space and maintaining the quality of content.

To further optimize the overall systems, we can follow a simplistic approach to create a hash of media content before storing the image to object storage, such as Amazon S3. The system checks if a hash is already available in the media database and returns the already created reference URL if a hash is available. In case the hash is not present in the database, the system creates a media hash, uploads the media content to object storage, and returns the reference URL (after storing the media hash and reference URL in the database). The system puts a maximum limit on the size of content shared, but it could be the case that multiple short videos are created from the bigger video and are shared among the users. In this case, the computed hash will be different, and the system will store both the big video and the short videos created from the bigger video. A better approach here could be to divide the video into multiple chunks (such as 500 KB each) and then compare the chunks hash with already stored chunks in the data store. We’ll discuss breaking a larger video into smaller chunks more in Chapter 20 .

The WhatsApp chat application is built in the Erlang programming language on top of Ejabberd open source software. Erlang is a functional programming language with built-in support of actors and is specifically designed to handle a huge number of concurrent connections. Let’s talk a little about the WhatsApp architecture with Erlang.

## WhatsApp Architecture with Erlang

Ejabberd is open source software specifically designed to support building near real-time chat applications. The software is built in Erlang and can be deployed as an XMPP server. Here is the list of features offered by Ejabberd out of the box, which also covers the defined functional requirements for our system:

- Support for one-to-one and group messaging
- Support for user last activity, user presence status, and typing indicator
- Support for the user’s contact list along with their presence status
- Support for message delivery receipts
- Support for sharing media content such as images, videos, and the like

Ejabberd offers a modular architecture and can easily be extended to meet any specific business requirements. Because Ejabberd is built on top of the Erlang programming language, it can use the language’s inherent support for message passing and concurrency. Ejabberd software can support more than two million concurrent users on a single machine, which is a great milestone and makes it ideal for managing large connection pools, saving the infrastructure costs. You can read additional use cases built on top of Ejabberd .

Erlang offers lightweight processes with very minimal resources as compared to processes from other programming languages. Most languages use the OS processes and threads for program execution, but Erlang creates its own independent processes in the user space that are not bound to kernel threads (or OS processes) in any way. Erlang uses BEAM (originally Bogdan’s Erlang Abstract Machine) as a VM to schedule and run the programs in the Erlang runtime environment. To compare BEAM with JVM, JVM maps its threads with the OS threads, and the OS takes the responsibility of thread scheduling. With Erlang, the scheduling is fully managed by BEAM to optimize the overall working of the system.

On top of all its other benefits, Erlang inherently supports hot-swap deployments, allowing users to upgrade the code without worrying about any impact. Hot-swap deployment means you can deploy new code on a production running server without any downtime or hampering the existing connections.

Now, let’s look at the overall system architecture of WhatsApp.

### System architecture

The WhatsApp architecture is very similar to what we already went over in previous sections. User devices establish a session with the chat daemons (similar to the frontend service in “Direct messaging” ) and web daemons managed by two separate frontend systems. Chat daemons are responsible for handling connections from mobile devices, and web daemons are responsible for handling connections from WhatsApp web clients. In addition to the two frontend systems, a separate system handles the media uploads and downloads from the users, and the media URL is used as a reference during chat communication. The chat and web daemons further connect with different backend Erlang clusters that are fully decoupled from one another to perform tasks like:

- Connecting with the user service to authenticate the user
- Connecting with the offline service to retrieve any messages pending for the user to be delivered

All the chat frontend nodes are fully interconnected with one another (fully mesh network topology), and messages are directly transferred between the users if they’re online, without the intervention of backend services. The mapping of users specific to the chat frontend server is maintained by the session service, and the user can reinitiate the connection in case the connection is dropped from either the user’s or the server’s end. Management of group relationships is handled by the group service, and push notifications are handled by the notification push service. The media servers are implemented on top of another Erlang open source software application, YAWS (Yet Another Web Server) . The overall architecture is shown in Figure 19-4 .

[image: image]

###### Figure 19-4. WhatsApp architecture

The multimedia system works similarly to what we discussed in the “Multimedia system” . We mentioned that the media content is deleted once the acknowledgment is received from all the recipients, but the WhatsApp system also configures some delay since there is always the possibility that once a user receives the images or video files, they will forward the messages to their friends and so on. Configuring some delay for deleting the media can save having to reupload it from the user devices and help optimize the overall performance of the system. This also saves bandwidth from the user’s end.

###### Note

There is a possibility that clients will drop off in the middle of the media-uploading process and therefore only parts of the media file are uploaded to the system. The multimedia system should keep a separate cleaning mechanism to clear out such files from the data store.

There are a lot of different kinds of mobile phones, and each one supports different formats of multimedia content. To ensure a good user experience, the multimedia system transcodes the media file into different formats (more on this in Chapter 20 ) and delivers it to the user based on their device.

There are also database offerings that are exclusively written in Erlang. Let’s discuss use cases for Mnesia and other storage solutions that are used in the WhatsApp architecture.

### Databases

Mnesia is a relational database, and Erlang term storage (ETS) is an in-memory data store for faster lookups; both are purpose built for Erlang. WhatsApp heavily uses both these data stores for its storage requirements. Let’s discuss some of the benefits that Mnesia offers as compared to traditional relational databases like MySQL:

- If the application is written in Erlang, Mnesia offers real-time data lookup by allowing data storage in the same memory space as the application.
- The data objects stored in the database and the Erlang application code are exactly the same, removing the need for data transformation.
- Mnesia allows dynamic reconfiguration of objects at runtime.
- The distributed nature of the Mnesia database provides high fault tolerance.

WhatsApp uses Mnesia as a data store to store all kinds of data, such as account and user profile information, group memberships, and media references and transcodings. WhatsApp deploys the database on the same cluster as the application code (note that they are moving to remote databases as part of the migration to Facebook infrastructure). Deployment of databases on the same instances as the application makes the system stateful and is generally not recommended to ensure easier recovery from system faults, but let’s talk about some of the benefits of databases and applications running on the same cluster instance.

For an independent remote database, we need to handle connectivity between application code and the database layer as well as routing, failovers, consistency, and reduced infrastructure management. This is not much of a bottleneck because of multiple offerings by cloud providers and makes the management task a piece of cake. In the Erlang cluster, the data is stored in Mnesia in smaller parts called islands . An island is a set of hosts that all share one schema, and each island consists of data from two hosts to provide redundancy in the form of primary and secondary partitions. The partitioning of data is created based on key-to-node mapping, much like how it’s handled in Amazon DynamoDB based on the partition key, as shown in Figure 19-5 .

The partitions are managed by Erlang gen_server deployment . The Erlang gen_server module offers the base functionality of client-server architecture. The client calls the server via an API, and the server acts on the client request and responds.

[image: image]

###### Figure 19-5. Island architecture

In previous sections, we mentioned using transient stores to store messages and media content in case users are offline. The lifecycle of data on the transient store is managed via the offline service. We can utilize the object stores provided by the cloud providers to store this kind of data, such as Amazon S3, but in the case of WhatsApp, the entire data store is in house, managed on the SSD and spinning disks. The storage drives are managed via the JBOD (Just a Bunch of Disks) system. JBOD allows multiple disks to be combined into one representation, and we can access the disks from the software as a single disk. Here are the implementation details for the transient message store:

- The messages corresponding to a user are stored on an append-only file, and the file is deleted once the messages are delivered to the user. The AOF file is like a mailbox that holds letters until they are picked up. The AOF files are kept on the storage partition dedicated to a set of users.
- The media files are stored in the directories, and the references are maintained in the Mnesia database.
- To ensure data redundancy, the data is stored on two parallel storage partitions. The messages are stored in two parallel files on the filesystem. Once the user comes back online, the offline system retrieves the file from both the storage partitions, combines the messages, removes any duplicates, and then sends the messages to the user’s device.

Images are stored on the SSD for faster storage and retrieval, and videos are stored on the slower spinning disks. In case the images are not delivered to the recipients within a specific threshold timeframe, they are moved to a slower storage solution to optimize the overall storage costs. The references should be updated in the databases when the files are moved from one location to another. As the messages are not persisted indefinitely at the server side, they are stored on the client device in a local SQLite database.

In the next section, we’ll design and deploy the chat application architecture on the AWS cloud.

# Launching the System on AWS

We discussed a couple of new concepts in this chapter around maintaining a persistent connection with user devices and offering near real-time behavior. In previous sections, we talked about a scalable architecture for designing a chat application, but we’ll start with a much simpler architecture in the Day 0 architecture, and later we’ll add enhancements. We’ll try to leverage fully managed services to reduce the time to market of the chat application. Later, we’ll figure out any potential bottlenecks and make amendments to the design to overcome those limitations.

## Day 0 Architecture

We explored AWS AppSync and the idea of fully managed, serverless WebSockets connections in Chapter 12 . The chat application requires persistent bidirectional connections, and AppSync is a good candidate to facilitate this requirement. This feature allows us to remove any work related to managing the frontend service responsible for connection management. We skipped user signups and further authentication in the system design section—Amazon Cognito can be leveraged for this functionality. For signups specifically, the authentication is based on a one-time password (OTP) on mobile phones. This is not offered out of the box in Cognito, so we’ll need a custom implementation for this feature.

To build the Day 0 architecture of the chat application, we can reference AWS shared blog posts on using AppSync and Amazon ElastiCache for Redis . Both of these posts include code samples for launching the application stack on the AWS cloud. The architecture with AppSync is illustrated in Figure 19-6 . Users interact via Cognito for authentication, which then makes a user entry in the DynamoDB table. AppSync establishes a direct connection with databases to store message and media content via persistent WebSocket connections. We can create separate AWS Lambda handlers for managing information for groups, notifications, user contacts, and the like.

[image: image]

###### Figure 19-6. Day 0 chat application architecture

Figure 19-6 is a simplistic view of the deployment. The DynamoDB in the architecture proposes a multitable design (separate tables for storing users, messages, and groups) instead of the generally recommended single-table design to store all the entities. The DynamoDB multitable design (a separate table for each core entity in the GraphQL schema) is generally recommended for GraphQL implementations due to the fact that clients can fire arbitrary requests for data retrieval and the query access patterns are not entirely fixed. The GraphQL resolvers logic can become quite complex with the single-table design, but you can always choose a combination of both if that suits your requirements best.

The Day 0 architecture we chose here is focused on using AWS-managed serverless services to reduce time to market and operational overhead. Evaluate open source software like Ejabberd for Day 0 architecture and deploying it on Amazon EC2 or containerization services.

To scale the system to a large set of concurrent users, we can always invest time in figuring out the challenges and fixing them. In the next section, we discuss such challenges and how we can resolve them to scale the system to millions and beyond.

## Scaling to Millions and Beyond

A chat application is a very user-heavy use case, and it should cater to an increasing user base without impacting the availability and performance of the app. The number of network connections is huge, so one important consideration in the architecture is congestion control. Congestion basically means the system is bombarded with more requests than it can actually handle, making the system use all of its resources without performing any actual work of serving the requests. This situation is similar to road traffic: the actual distance covered by a vehicle reduces as the number of vehicles on the road increases.

### Congestion handling

Here are some mechanisms that are useful for detecting and controlling the congestion problem:

Graceful degradation

Once the system realizes it’s not possible to serve all the requests successfully, it should be able to drop some of the requests to clear the clutter. The mechanism of dropping the requests can vary from use case to use case; the system can discard all the new requests or discard the older requests based on some set expiration. It is always better to serve some requests than to serve nothing at all. You might have seen dog photos on amazon.com whenever Amazon is unable to fulfill a request—this is one way to return a custom error page if the system is overloaded with user requests. In the context of AWS services, the rate limiting on specific thresholds can be implemented with the help of AWS WAF. The system should be able to knock out malicious unwanted traffic, which can be done with tools like AWS WAF and AWS Shield.

Retry, but not too much

Both client applications and users use retry as a common solution if there’s no response within a certain time frame or if they receive an error response from the server application. Users do this by refreshing the browser web page. To avoid a storm of retries, the client should be informed with proper error message details to determine if it’s worth retrying the request. Further, the retry should be allowed based on the number of successful requests—for example, only allow one retry if there are one hundred successful requests (retries just with exponential backoffs are not helpful in these scenarios). Another mechanism for independent processing of requests could be decoupling systems by introducing a queue in between, such as SQS. This enables producers to publish requests and consumers to consume the requests at their own rates without overloading the system.

System testing

The system should be tested for its functionality beyond the expected load, and there should be proper operational mechanisms (metrics, alarms, dashboards, and runbooks) set up to identify and fix the issues. The system should also be chaos tested with tools like Amazon FIS to identify any loopholes in worst-case scenarios, such as an entire AZ going down or CPU utilization bumping to 100%.

We used AWS AppSync for managing WebSocket connections in the Day 0 architecture. Per the AWS documentation, there is no hard limit on the number of WebSocket connections, and it should scale with the increasing scale. There are some other AWS services offering WebSocket support; let’s discuss them in the next section.

### WebSocket management services

AWS has enabled the WebSocket feature in multiple AWS services. The other options apart from AppSync for managing WebSockets are Amazon API Gateway, AWS IoT Core , and load balancer services. Some key considerations in the context of building chat applications are listed in Table 19-1 .

| Key factor | Amazon API Gateway | AWS IoT Core | ELB |
|---|---|---|---|
| Definition | Creates and manages REST, HTTP, and WebSocket APIs at any scale | Enables IoT devices to securely connect with cloud applications and other devices | Distributes incoming traffic across multiple targets (revisit Chapter 9 for more about ELB and API Gateway) |
| Support for persistent connections | WebSocket APIs support | MQTT over WebSocket support | Both ALB and NLB allow a connection upgrade to the WebSocket type |
| Document reference for chat application | Building a chat application with the WebSocket API, DynamoDB, and Lambda | Building a chat application with AWS IoT Core via MQTT over WebSocket | No specific documentation by AWS, but the concept is similar to using WebSockets for persistent connections |

There are many other differences between these services, and they offer different benefits. Review the updated guidance on their product pages to help you determine if they meet your business requirements. For a scale as big as WhatsApp, consider managing the system on your own to gain more control over your configurations than you would have with managed services.

AppSync doesn’t have any server management overhead, so we don’t have to worry about scaling up and down. In case we decide to deploy a frontend service to manage the WebSocket connections, we should come up with our ideal instance configurations and the maximum number of connections that can be supported by one instance. The best approach for estimating this number is load testing the system and accordingly tuning the configurations.

We discussed the idea of multiregion deployments in Chapter 16 , and this becomes important for chat application scale as well. Let’s discuss the messaging architecture in the context of systems deployed in multiple regions.

### Multiregion deployment of messaging systems

With multiregion deployment, users communicating with one another can be located in different regions and connected to separate regions. For such use cases, interregion communication should be incorporated in a latency-effective manner. AWS regions are connected with one another on a dedicated network, so we don’t have to worry about handling the region connectivity infrastructure. Chapter 16 focused on the idea that the data of all the users is replicated in the regions, but we may choose to optimize to store user data in only two regions (for redundancy and handling regional failures) instead of all of them. This means that data should be sent to another region for serving the user query because the data is not locally persisted.

Let’s take an example of one-to-one messaging between two users located in different geographies: chat servers will connect them to different regional servers. Here are two mechanisms we can explore for connectivity across the regions:

- The send message notification (message from user A to user B) is published to every region; the consumer in every region figures out if the intended recipient belongs to the region. If yes, then it will deliver the message if the user is online or persist the message to the offline system for future delivery.
- A global data store is used for ElastiCache Redis for session service. The global data store helps figure out the exact region a user is connected to, and a message is sent to a specific region only.

For either of these two approaches to work, we need a user registry to figure out the primary region for a user; this is also important for handling offline-user message delivery. We can very well leverage DynamoDB global tables for this use case.

To summarize, we recommend using a global data store for ElastiCache to figure out a user’s region if the user is online and deliver the message directly. If a user is not found, use DynamoDB to identify the user region, and the message is handled by the offline system.

With this understanding, let’s move to the Day N architecture.

## Day N Architecture

Figure 19-4 shows the WhatsApp architecture, a very simple architecture that is able to serve billions of messages every day. The infrastructure is managed in house and deployed on bare-metal servers.

We’ll try to leverage AWS components to deploy the systems and meet the data storage requirements. The architecture uses Amazon ECS for deploying services, and we use DynamoDB as a database in most of the applications. As mentioned in “Message storage” , both relational and nonrelational databases meet the system requirements, and you can choose a solution based on previous expertise. Aurora Serverless Limitless Database discussed in Chapter 18 is one option for managed relational databases, but you should definitely consider managing the database on your own for fine-tuning of configurations at WhatsApp scale. Figure 19-7 illustrates what our own chat app architecture might look like when deployed on the AWS cloud.

[image: image]

###### Figure 19-7. Chat application Day N architecture

Here’s a summary of the different components from the system architecture:

Frontend system

Gateway layer for user connections. It works in conjunction with the session manager system to store user device connectivity information with available servers.

Multimedia system

Uses a combination of Amazon S3 and Amazon CloudFront for media storage and caching capabilities. The multimedia system also uses DynamoDB to store the metadata of media content. The multimedia system works like the video-ingestion pipeline that we will discuss in Chapter 20 for content ingestion into the system and then delivery to users in an efficient manner.

User service

Responsible for user authentication and maintaining account information.

Notification system

Delivers notifications to user devices for new messages by using Amazon SNS. Amazon SNS sends the notification to Firebase Cloud Messaging (FCM) servers for Android devices and Apple Push Notification (APN) servers for Apple devices. We’ve kept a very simplistic view of the notification service to limit the scope of this chapter; read company engineering blogs on this topic (e.g., Uber’s blog post on optimization of push notifications) to see how it works at a huge scale.

Offline system

Stores and manages the message when the user device is not connected to the frontend system.

Groups manager system

Maintains all the group-related information and delivers messages to group members.

The logging and monitoring components are not shown in the architecture diagram, but having them in place is important. We can leverage AWS services like Amazon CloudWatch for storing logs and set up metrics and alerts for visualization and health monitoring.

# Conclusion

The WhatsApp architecture is based on one simple principle: “just enough engineering.” Simple architectures scale well and require fewer people to manage the systems and the underlying infrastructure. To start with—as we’ve done in previous chapters—we recommend leveraging cloud provider services to launch and manage the solutions, which can reduce the overall time to market. You can move to different solutions if the need arises.

The choice of language, networking protocol, and implementation paradigm is important for large-scale applications and should be carefully evaluated before application launch. Moving from one programming language to another can prove to be a big pain point once the system is already serving a large user base—it can definitely be achieved, but it’s much easier to take that into consideration from the start (with whatever data points you have at that time).

Load testing and chaos engineering are important techniques for figuring out system bottlenecks and identifying system limits. Keep metrics and alarms from day one to monitor system performance. System CPU utilization being at 100% doesn’t mean the system is always busy working; there is the possibility of congestion as well, so load testing always helps to decipher these scenarios.

In this chapter, we started talking about uploading video and transcoding it to different formats. We’ll discuss this in much more detail in the next chapter.

[image: ]

### System Design on AWS

Jayanth Kumar , Mandeep Singh
Published by O'Reilly Media, Inc.20% completeContent Progress 20% completedApprox. 15 hours left

1. Foreword queue 100% complete checkmark circle
2. Preface queue 100% complete checkmark circle
3. I. System Design Basics queue 100% complete checkmark circle
4. 1. System Design Trade-offs and Guidelines queue 54% complete
5. 2. Storage Types and Relational Stores queue 1% complete
6. 3. Nonrelational Stores queue 100% complete checkmark circle
7. 4. Caching Policies and Strategies queue 2% complete
8. 5. Load Balancing Approaches and Techniques queue 3% complete
9. 6. Communication Networks and Protocols queue 2% complete
10. 7. Containerization, Orchestration, and Deployments queue 2% complete
11. 8. Architectural Designs and Patterns queue 1% complete
12. II. Diving Deep into AWS Services queue
13. 9. AWS Network Services queue 2% complete
14. 10. AWS Storage Services queue 1% complete
15. 11. AWS Compute Services queue 3% complete
16. 12. AWS Messaging, Orchestration, Monitoring, and Access Management Services queue 100% complete checkmark circle
17. 13. Big Data, Analytics, and Machine Learning Services queue
18. III. System Design Use Cases queue
19. 14. Designing a URL Shortener Service queue 2% complete
20. 15. Designing a Web Crawler and Search Engine queue 1% complete
21. 16. Designing a Social Network and Newsfeed System queue 2% complete
22. 17. Designing an Online Game Leaderboard queue 2% complete
23. 18. Designing a Hotel Reservation System queue 2% complete
24. 19. Designing a Chat Application queue 100% complete checkmark circle System Requirements Show More Items Starting with the Design Show More Items Launching the System on AWS Show More Items Conclusion
25. 20. Designing a Video-Processing Pipeline for a Streaming Service queue
26. 21. Designing an Online Stock-Trading Platform queue
27. Index queue
28. About the Authors queue
