# Chapter 21. Designing an Online Stock-Trading Platform

There are a lot of online platforms available to help you invest money in stocks, such as Robinhood , Zerodha , and Groww . These platforms, called stockbrokers , work as intermediaries between stock exchanges and users. Stock exchanges are marketplaces where stocks are bought and sold. A few examples include the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) in the US and the National Stock Exchange (NSE) of India. Figure 21-1 illustrates the interaction between the user, the stockbroker, and the stock exchange.

[image: image]

###### Figure 21-1. Users, stockbrokers, and stock exchange

Buying or selling a stock is called an order . The order is executed on the customer’s behalf by the stockbroker. In a nutshell, you give money to a stockbroker to buy or sell a particular stock, and the broker talks to the stock exchange to execute the order.

###### Note

This chapter focuses on the design of a stockbroker application, not a stock exchange application. Trading stocks is a complicated topic, and we don’t suggest referring to this chapter as a guide to stock trading but rather as a technical deep dive into the underlying system architecture.

We recommend surfing through a stockbroker application if you’ve never had a chance to help understand the application features so that you can determine the system requirements of our stockbroker application. Let’s move to those system requirements next.

# System Requirements

A stockbroker application offers a wide range of features, but this chapter focuses on the core functionality of buying and selling stocks. The buying and selling of any stock is generally referred to as order execution in the trading world. Let’s start with the functional and nonfunctional requirements of the system, and then we’ll discuss the expected scale.

## Functional and Nonfunctional Requirements

The core feature of any stockbroker application is buying and selling stocks. There are some additional features we need to offer to customers to help them make decisions regarding trading stocks. The application only allows buying and selling of stocks during the trading hours of the stock exchange, which generally are six to seven hours of the day. For example, the trading hours for the Nasdaq stock exchange are 9:30 A.M. to 4:00 P.M. EST.

Here is the list of functional requirements that the system should support:

- Users can search by stock name or company name. For example, the stock for Amazon.com, Inc. is listed with the name AMZN on the Nasdaq stock exchange.
- The stock price should be updated in real time with other relevant details, such as average trade price, last opening and closing price, and so on.
- Users can buy new stocks and sell existing stocks.
- Users can view candlestick charts of any stock over the requested time period.
- Users can view their portfolios with profit and loss (P&L) overall and for individual stocks.

The NFRs of the system are also very critical and should be taken into consideration during the system design. Here is the list of NFRs that the system should ensure:

- The system should be highly available and able to withstand hardware failures or data center downtimes.
- The system should be highly scalable to cater to increasing traffic.
- The system should be highly reliable and durable. There should not be any loss of messages, such as order execution and responses from stock exchange systems.
- The system should operate at submillisecond (< 100 ms) latency for market order executions.
- Strong consistency support is needed in the overall system operations.

## System Scale

The system operates and interacts with customers heavily during trading hours. During off-market hours, the system runs other jobs, such as gathering the trades of the day from the exchanges and sending executed trade details to the customers. We’ll take Zerodha’s scale numbers as our base and add to it to take into account future growth:

Number of active users on platform = 50 million

Number of users actually executing trades = 10 million

Average number of trades per user = 2

Number of trades per day = 20 million

The 50 million active users are viewing the live stock prices and checking their portfolios, so at any time the system must serve read queries for this set of users. The number of stock-price updates delivered to users per second on average by the broker system is three (for Level 2 data, discussed more in “Designing a Stock Tick System” ). For 50 million active users, the system delivers 150 million stock updates every second.

The number of companies listed on the stock exchange varies based on the country and exchange. Here are a few numbers we can take as reference:

NSE, India ~ 2,300

Nasdaq, US ~ 3,300

NYSE, US ~ 2,800

You can assume that the number of public companies doesn’t grow exponentially and that only a very few companies are added from time to time. We’ll move to the design of the system next, keeping these requirements and scale considerations in mind.

# Starting with the Design

Like the web crawler and search engine ( Chapter 15 ) and the hotel reservation system ( Chapter 18 ), the stock-trading platform consists of two systems. One system ingests the data from exchange platforms for live stock pricing, and another system executes customer orders. We’ll first talk about data ingestion to support delivering live and historical stock prices to end users and then move to our system design for buying and selling stocks.

## Designing a Stock Tick System

Stock tick means the price change of a stock; the broker system captures price changes from the exchange system and streams them to users watching the stocks. The price change is streamed in near real time without any delays to help customers make decisions regarding whether to buy or sell stocks. The architecture is a mirror image of Figure 21-1 , where the exchange system streams the data, and then the brokerage application consumes it and further streams it to the end customers.

In “System Scale” , we assumed that 20 million trades are executed per day on the broker application. There can be multiple such platforms where users are executing trades, and then there are HFT firms for executing automated trading at a high frequency. The point is that the number of trades executed on a stock exchange platform is really huge (take a look at historical data for NSE India and Nasdaq ), and consuming all this data inside a brokerage application requires a lot of resources. Further, broker applications need to pay a specific amount to exchange platforms for market-data consumption.

Keep in mind that most customers don’t require data for every order executed on the exchange platform if we leave HFTs out of the picture: the primary reason is that the user will not be able to comprehend these vast amounts of live data to make decisions without the help of computer algorithms, and stock exchanges charge fees to deliver this data via a well-designed networking infrastructure. To cater to this, stock exchanges generally offer different types of data streams based on the amount of data needed. Taking an example of NSE India (similar levels are offered by other exchange platforms, such as Nasdaq ), the real-time data is offered at four levels: levels 1−3 and tick-by-tick (TBT). Level 1 provides the best bid and ask price; level 2 provides market depth data up to five best bid and ask prices; level 3 provides market depth data up to the 20 best bid and ask prices; and TBT provides a full order book (all the orders executed on the exchange platform).

###### Note

The bid price is the highest price a buyer is willing to pay for a specific number of shares of a stock at a particular time. The ask price refers to the lowest price at which a seller agrees to sell a stock.

We’ll limit the scope of architecture in this chapter to level 1−3 data consumption, considering the system design requirements of a broker application and not an HFT. SSEs and WebSockets, which we discussed in Chapter 6 , are good choices for data consumption from stock exchanges. There is no standard communication protocol used by all the stock exchanges—it varies from one exchange to another—but one of the popular protocols is the Financial Information eXchange (FIX) protocol . The means used for data delivery can also vary from exchange to exchange. Here are a few of the possible methods for delivering market data:

Cloud subscription

The exchange allows clients to subscribe to its endpoints and receive the data. The endpoint could be a persistent or one-way connection (depending on the exchange).

Direct connection

The exchange offers server racks in its facility, and clients can place hardware in colocated (referred to as colo ) locations with exchange servers. The client hardware at the exchange facility is connected to a client’s on-premises data center to directly receive the data. With NSE India , for example, Zerodha’s broker application delivers level 3 data to customers by consuming the TBT data, converting it to level 3, and then streaming it to the user application.

Vendor connection

A direct connection might not be cost-effective for all consumers. These consumers can leverage vendor integrations and achieve similar functionality. For example, LSEG Data & Analytics is integrated with more than five hundred global exchanges to deliver TBT data.

The exchanges also offer snapshots of historical data to broker applications, which can be used for use cases like candlestick charts.

Now, let’s talk about how the broker application’s backend systems make sense of this data and stream it to the front-facing application for viewing. The flow is similar to the data stream delivery between the stock exchanges and brokers. We can think of this architecture in two parts: live stock tick data and historical stock market data.

### Live stock ticks

Latency is critical when delivering live stock ticks to the end customers: the data should be presented to the viewers as soon as it is available from the stock exchanges. This architecture is similar to the messaging architecture in Chapter 19 ; the only difference is the broker system is the one that is sending messages to users instead of users exchanging messages with one another. Ordering of messages is also important. The technological solution should ensure that the data is reflected to users in the order in which it arrived.

The stock updates are consumed by the stock tick consumer service (STCS), one of the backend services in the broker architecture. The STCS is a very lightweight service responsible for forwarding the updates received from exchange systems to internal backend services. Message forwarding is done asynchronously by publishing the updates to Kafka. In the broker architecture, two systems will consume these updates: the live stock tick system and the historical stock tick system (discussed in the next section). Kafka can handle the expected scale and provides message ordering, guaranteeing that we can meet one of our system requirements. An additional event-ordering mechanism can be built into the client application where the application can discard any old events based on event sequencing.

The stock live ticker service (SLTS) consumes messages from Kafka and delivers them to the end users in real time. The SLTS maintains persistent connections with end user devices and works similarly to the frontend chat servers in the chat application architecture discussed in Chapter 19 . The SLTS contains two in-memory tables: one maintaining the stock prices and the other listing users interested in a specific stock. An interesting point to note here is that there are multiple price entries associated with a single stock (depending on the data depth supported by the system) and updated in near real time. These use cases can be solved by using data structures like balanced trees and priority queues of fixed length or by leveraging Redis sorted sets.

The stock price table is a global key-value store accessible to all the servers of the SLTS, and connection data is maintained locally by each server, as shown in Figure 21-2 .

Let’s talk a little about persistent connections between user devices and SLTS servers. Once the user is authenticated on the application, a persistent connection is established, and a connection ID is generated for the user device. This connection ID is handled by one of the SLTS servers. The server keeps an in-memory table mapping the stock name to a list of connection IDs interested in the stock. If there are any faults on the SLTS server, the user device establishes a new connection with a new connection ID, and a server is assigned to the user for receiving stock updates. A connection ID is managed by a lightweight thread or process of the system, and a single SLTS server is capable of handling thousands (on the order of 100,000) of such connections (benchmarking should be done to figure out the maximum connections that a single server can support). The lightweight thread can be managed by programming-language-specific constructs, such as Akka actors for JVM languages (or recently launched Java virtual threads), goroutines in Go, or processes in Erlang.

[image: image]

###### Figure 21-2. Live stock ticks architecture

The live stock updates have these steps: the exchange publishes a stock update; the STCS ingests the update and publishes it to Kafka; the SLTS updates the stock price to a global key-value store (such as Redis); and the SLTS checks for a connection ID interested in the stock and sends the updates to the users’ devices. Thinking ahead, there can be two optimizations possible in the SLTS architecture:

- The SLTS is responsible for two actions: persisting the stock price updates to the global key-value store and maintaining the persistent connections with user devices. We can break this into two service deployments: a Kafka consumer is responsible for consuming the update and updating the stock price, and another service is responsible for delivering the stock updates to end user devices.
- The number of stocks listed on the stock exchange is limited, and we can keep a copy of stock prices in memory on the SLTS server. The idea is to keep a hot cache on top of a Redis cache for inferring the stock prices and making the system faster overall. Redis acts as a persistent data store, and the application servers can retrieve the data from Redis on restarts or when a new server is added to the pool.

The live stock ticks delivered to users calculate the P&L of user’s stocks in real time and update the dashboard. Now, let’s look into deriving historical market data for the users.

### Historical stock ticks

The consumer of the historical stock tick service (HSTS) consumes the stock price updates from Kafka and then stores them to the database. The use case of the HSTS is to serve the historical price of a particular stock, so the data should be stored in a database such that we’re able to figure out the stock price at any particular timestamp. We discussed the Amazon Timestream database in Chapter 10 ; it is the most feasible choice for such use cases. A lot of other time-series database choices are available in the market, such as InfluxDB and ClickHouse , and you should make your choice based on previous expertise and building a proof of concept for your use case. Like SLTS, the HSTS has two service deployments: one for writing stock price updates and another for serving the user read queries.

Most of the read queries served to the system are for a recent time period, such as one day or one week. There are fewer queries as the period increases to lengths such as one month, one year, or greater than a year. For this kind of query pattern, data archival becomes important to reduce costs associated with older data infrequently accessed by users. Data archival is available inherently in the Timestream database , and we don’t need to configure any manual processes. Timestream comes with two storage tiers: memory store and magnetic store. The memory store can be used to serve the most recent queries. After the configured time period, the data is automatically moved to the magnetic store. We can also configure a retention period on the magnetic store; the data is permanently deleted from the magnetic store after this time.

The user checks for current stock prices and historical trends and then can choose to sell existing stocks or buy new stocks. This is handled by the order management system (OMS).

## Designing the Order Management System

We already described the order as a stock buy or sell operation. The OMS converts user interest (stock buy or sell) to an order request and forwards it to the exchange system for execution. The OMS runs a set of prevalidations to ensure that all compliance regulations are met before the request is sent to the exchange system. The validation system or risk management system (RMS) runs as a separate service to ensure independent operations and scaling. The high-level picture of order execution through the OMS is shown in Figure 21-3 .

The responsibility of the OMS can vary depending on the country where the broker application is operating. Here are two segments in which the OMS can operate:

- The OMS creates an order request based on user input and passes it to the stock exchange for execution. The exchange system takes responsibility for matching this order against another order (a buy order matched against a sell order; reference the order-matching algorithm used by NSE India) and completing it.
- The OMS can match the order from the user pool and then forward the matched order to the exchange system.

[image: image]

###### Figure 21-3. Order execution

The OMS can be self-hosted by the broker system, or third-party solutions can be leveraged. For example, Zerodha uses a combination of self-hosted and third-party OMSs provided by Refinitiv. The third-party OMS generally offers a combination of features, including RMS and connectivity to the exchange systems from the broker systems’ data centers. Let’s take a look at an example architecture at Zerodha to understand end-to-end connectivity using AWS, an on-premises data center, and the exchange system. The users connect to systems via Cloudflare CDN to place orders on a frontend trading application. The trading application communicates with other backend services (such as request validation) and the OMS on an on-premises data center via AWS Direct Connect for faster communication. The on-premises data center communicates with the exchange systems over a dedicated leased line for final order execution, as shown in Figure 21-4 .

The broker backend application also creates an internal order, which maps to the order created by the exchange system. This internal order maintains a reference to the external exchange order and other relevant details, such as payment details for order processing. The internal order is created with a unique identifier and helps with ensuring idempotency of the request (no duplicate order execution). The stock exchange system replies with acknowledgment of the request being received, and further updates are sent asynchronously for actions taken against the order.

[image: image]

###### Figure 21-4. Order execution architecture at Zerodha

In the previous sections, we discussed the choices of database as Redis for live stock prices and a time-series database for serving historical stock price charts. Here are the data store requirements for the internal OMS:

- Create an entry in the database for an order before execution.
- Update the entry after acknowledgment is received from the exchange system with details like the order status, timestamp, amount executed by the exchange system (the amount can vary between the time the order was initiated on the broker application and the time the order actually got executed by the exchange system), and exchange order reference.

The database should comply with ACID properties and be scalable to handle a high write load (the system is write heavy as compared to reads). Here are a few of the use cases for reads and writes to the database:

- Create a reference order for an order made by the user.
- Check the status of an order.
- Fetch the user’s tradebook (all the orders processed on behalf of the user by the broker system).
- When an order is moved to user holdings (stocks bought by a user) after a fixed time interval (which varies from exchange to exchange), exchange systems generally share files with the details. The system bulk loads this data to the database.
- This is also applicable to orders placed in advance and executed later based on the type : market, limit, or stop-loss.

The latency is critical for live order execution, so database I/O reduction is the key to resolving this. An in-memory data store like Redis is used for end-to-end order execution, and the system in parallel persists this data to a disk data store like PostgreSQL. We’ve explored using Amazon DynamoDB for transactional workloads in previous chapters, and we can very well use that here as well. DynamoDB offers predictable response times for point queries on the primary key. In case you choose a nondistributed relational data store, we recommend database sharding, considering the scale requirements we finalized. To start, you can create logical database partitions and then move to actual physical partitions when the need arises. For the stockbroker application, the partitioning can be based on the time range, such as weekly or monthly.

Low latency is one of the NFRs we discussed in “System Requirements” . As mentioned previously, the stockbroker application doesn’t target microsecond-magnitude latency like HFT firms do. Latency should definitely be in the submilliseconds, though, so that users don’t see delays when viewing the stock prices. Let’s discuss a few of the aspects related to ultra-low-latency systems.

## Designing Ultra-Low-Latency Systems

Achieving extremely low latency like HFTs do is not feasible for broker applications due to the way the systems are architected. The broker applications connect to users on the public network as opposed to any dedicated network, which adds extra latency in data delivery. In the context of HFT system requirements, the system should be able to ingest TBT market data, run some algorithms to figure out an action (buy a stock, sell a stock, or no action), and execute an order per the evaluation. This whole process should take the minimum possible time to achieve maximum market gains.

The HFT system’s architecture is similar to direct connectivity between broker application on-premises data centers and exchange systems over a dedicated network. Let’s discuss a few of the techniques that HFTs employ to achieve ultra-low latency in systems, starting with network connectivity between different components.

### Network connectivity

There is dedicated network connectivity between HFT systems and the exchange systems to avoid any issues related to network bandwidth. The exchange system requires that the leased lines used have the same capabilities for all the HFTs to ensure fairness among all the firms. The HFT backend system consists of multiple microservices, and there is connectivity involved in these services as well.

A network call to another service could add to the latency, so this is not a feasible approach; the microservices should be executed in shared memory for ultra-fast processing. Aeron clusters and Chronicle queues are a couple of the solutions that can be used to achieve this in a fault-tolerant manner. Another consideration for low-latency systems is managing hardware resources for executing programs. The program thread should not wait for resources or get blocked on any other thread for execution. To solve this, HFT software systems tend to rely on single-threaded systems with no thread-synchronization requirements.

###### Note

Evaluate business use cases carefully to figure out the most feasible architecture. A single-threaded execution makes sense for HFT software systems, while huge lightweight threads are helpful in chat systems (refer to Chapter 19 ).

These are some of the ways to improve network connectivity among HFT systems. The next important consideration is the choice of programming language; some languages offer inherently faster code execution compared to others, and that becomes very important for latency-critical applications.

### Programming language

The design can be incredibly good, but if the programming language does other stuff along with code execution, then it adds to the latency. One such popular example of additional work is GC. We talked about how GC can affect system performance in previous chapters, such as tombstones in Apache Cassandra, and you need to figure out a way to get around this for languages like Java. The idea is to have maximum control over how the code is being executed on the hardware to optimize to a magnitude of microseconds. This ideology is similar to using AWS fully managed services versus taking the operational overhead on your own plate. To avoid GC issues, you can choose programming languages like C and C++, but they come with memory-management overhead.

There are pros and cons associated with all programming languages that will need thorough analysis before choosing one. For example, if we go ahead with a JVM language like Java, the GC issues can be addressed with the following techniques:

- Leverage technologies such as Azul Platform Prime that inherently improve the Java code efficiency.
- Introduce programming techniques that don’t require GC, such as using off-heap memory (memory allocated to the OS outside the purview of JVM), warming up the code before the market opens, or preallocating memory to the pool (no allocation or deletion requirement at runtime). Preallocation is much like using an already established persistent connection instead of reinitiating a TCP handshake every time.

There are other choices, such as FPGA and application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC), which are faster than Java or C++, but these choices are difficult to program and come with their own set of problems. For example, FPGA takes between around 30 minutes and 30 hours for compilation, depending on the program’s complexity and the machine type, increasing the deployment time for any critical bug fixes.

The best architectures perform well on the best hardware, so choosing hardware configurations is equally as important as making software architecture decisions. A lot of options are available from the cloud providers to run HFT software, such as Amazon EC2 z1d instances for fast single-threaded execution.

Once you’ve viewed the stocks based on live stock ticks and historical stocks charts and placed an order, the next action is viewing your P&L dashboard and other analytics on top of it.

## Building the P&L Dashboard

The P&L dashboard shows the user’s stock holdings at any point in time, which consists of the P&L of each individual stock as well as the overall portfolio. The P&L dashboard should also be updated in real time based on the stock ticks we discussed in “Live stock ticks” . The real-time update logic can be handled in the client-facing application itself based on the events received over the persistent connection.

The P&L dashboard is derived data from the order execution database (the user tradebook). The idea is to maintain this separately as user holdings instead of computing it at runtime because it is frequently accessed by the users. The calculation of P&L is pretty simple and can be done in these two steps:

1. Get all the stock holdings of a user.
2. Subtract the summation of all the sell orders from the summation of all the buy orders for each of these stocks.

The logic is simple, but the trades can span years; for example, you sell 50% of your stock holdings, which were bought five years ago. This makes derivation of data difficult and is the main reason to perform the operation during off-market hours. One important point to note here is that users’ holdings don’t change throughout the day but are settled at the end of the day by the exchange systems.

Let’s illustrate a simplified schema with Amazon DynamoDB. The following schema is a simple example that gets all stocks for the userId with their P&L:

Partition key = {userId}

Sort key for overall P&L = PL

Sort key for each stock = S#{stockName}

We can also maintain the overall P&L in the same table by keeping the same partition key and distinguishing the sort key by an additional prefix.

This schema is for illustrative purposes only. The same table may consist of other entities to solve different query patterns. Older data can be archived to S3 based on configured TTL or moved to DynamoDB standard IA from standard mode, optimizing the storage costs. Standard IA has increased read and write costs, but again it is designed for infrequent access and achieves 60% cost optimization on storage.

We can create similar tables in RDBMS as well to support all the P&L use cases. Taking an example from the Zerodha broker application , the console application (the service responsible for handling P&L) creates a PostgreSQL caching layer on top of the primary PostgreSQL database (bulk updated based on files received from the exchange at the end of the day during off-market hours). The caching PostgreSQL creates millions of tables for the users to maintain their holdings, which are updated every day based on the trades completed for the day.

###### Note

The AWS blog describes how Zerodha systems perform P&L calculations during off-market hours using the AWS Batch service. Batch is a fully managed batch computing service to schedule and run heavy workloads on a range of AWS compute services: Amazon EC2, Amazon ECS, and Amazon EKS.

Different analytics are also offered by the broker application, and they can best be served by using an analytical database like Amazon Redshift and building a dashboard with solutions like Metabase or Amazon QuickSight. The key consideration for analytical queries is that we can survive with a little lag in serving the response, but it should not be too large (less than five seconds).

Now, let’s move to the deployment of the architectures we discussed on the AWS cloud.

# Launching the System on AWS

We took various architecture references in the previous sections from Zerodha’s systems. Zerodha self-hosts most of its services on bare-metal EC2 instances for full control over infrastructure tuning and management. As we have reiterated, every decision in the system-design process is a trade-off, and it’s important that you understand the reasoning for how a decision aligns with the business use case. An important consideration in systems like online broker applications is that there are compliance regulations in place that should be adhered to from day one. We’ll start with the Day 0 architecture on the AWS cloud to launch the systems quickly and then move toward scaling and coming up with a highly scalable architecture.

## Day 0 Architecture

The Day 0 architecture should be modular such that compliance regulations can be easily addressed and don’t become a blocker in software development. Another benefit of modular architecture is breaking a single service into multiple microservices later down the line with ease. We explored using AWS AppSync in Chapter 19 for creating persistent connections and supporting delivery of user messages in near real time. The broker application has a requirement for delivering stock ticks, so a similar implementation can be used here.

The system requirements state that the system is heavily accessed by the users during market hours, and then the customer-facing traffic drops exponentially. AppSync automatically scales per the required connections and doesn’t require a manual intervention (refer to the AWS blog for implementation using AppSync and Amazon MSK). The systems leverage third-party systems like LSEG Data & Analytics for consumption of live market data. The market data streams are consumed at an NLB endpoint and distributed among the Amazon ECS Fargate tasks. The ECS Fargate ingestors publish this data to MSK, which is streamed to AppSync for data delivery to users over persistent connections. The market data from MSK is also consumed by another stock ticker consumer for ingestion to an Amazon Timestream database to serve historical market data queries. There are separate modules for ingesting the data and serving user queries, as shown in Figure 21-5 .

The next part is allowing users to place an order for a stock listed on the exchange. The Day 0 architecture should also be built keeping low latency in mind—it may not be as low as 50−100 ms but should definitely be under one second. The broker system leverages the third-party OMS, such as Refinitiv (acquired by LSEG), and uses AWS Direct Connect for communication between applications hosted in the AWS cloud and Refinitiv servers. The internal trading service handles the user’s order request, validates the request via the rule management service, and forwards the request to the Refinitiv OMS upon validation. The OMS talks with the exchange systems for order matching and execution, as shown in Figure 21-6 . The acknowledgment to this request is captured and reflected to the customer.

[image: image]

###### Figure 21-5. Live and historical ticks Day 0 architecture

[image: image]

###### Figure 21-6. Order management Day 0 architecture

The internal trading service uses Amazon Aurora to persist the order entries and publishes events for the order status to be consumed by services like the dashboard service (responsible for computing user P&L and other analytics). The dashboard service uses Amazon Redshift to offer different kinds of analytics.

## Scaling to Millions and Beyond

The customer-facing traffic mostly occurs during market hours, so autoscaling plays an important role in saving overall infrastructure costs. Apart from the customer traffic, multiple offline jobs run during off-market hours, such as sending PDFs to users for trades done during the day, settling orders based on files received from exchange systems, and calculating users’ P&Ls after the settlement cycle. These jobs are not latency critical and can be performed at their own pace, keeping a balance of cost and execution time.

A key consideration for ensuring low latency is keeping the systems in close vicinity (less physical distance). For example, the trading application should be close to the end users to reduce the network hops for connections; the OMS should be close to the exchange systems for faster order execution; and the backend applications should be colocated, avoiding network hops.

Here are some other considerations for ensuring low latency for the customer-facing systems:

Prewarm infrastructure

AWS offers scheduled scaling capability , allowing the system to autoscale based on a configured clock time. This ensures that the system is ready to serve the traffic and requests don’t wait in a queue for execution. AWS also provides warm pools for applications that take a longer boot time and could be useful for autoscaling quickly for any unplanned sudden traffic burst or hardware failures on running systems. We recommend keeping the application binary to the absolute minimum, keeping it lightweight (fewer external dependencies and small module-based services) without overburdening it with a lot of implementation logic.

Cross-AZ deployments

We generally recommend deploying the infrastructure across the AZs in a region for higher application reliability and to withstand AZ downtimes, but this can add to the latency. For example, an internal trading service instance in us-east-1a connects with an RMS instance in us-east-1b for validation; this could have been faster if both services were located in the same AZ. This is only recommended for services with requirements for very low latency because the AWS AZs and regions are connected by dedicated networks, and by default, it takes very little time (this is similar to an EC2 instance connecting with an instance store versus EBS volumes). The system should have a disaster-recovery mechanism for AZ or region downtimes.

VPC connectivity

The VPC can span multiple AZs and host the infrastructure in different AZs based on the subnet, as we discussed in Chapter 9 . Let’s say we decide to host the infrastructure in a single AZ: do the applications span multiple VPCs or belong to the same VPC? Hosting in a single VPC can be an ideal scenario for minimum latency with the assumption that multiple VPCs (in the same or separate AWS accounts) are needed for clear division. The VPC connectivity becomes important for such scenarios, and we recommend VPC peering over AWS Transit Gateways to reduce a network hop and decrease latency.

EC2 placement groups

There are multiple server racks in the AZ, and the different microservices can be present on different racks, adding to the latency. AWS offers an EC2 placement groups feature , which ensures that the EC2 machines allocated to you belong to the same server rack. This strategy goes against the general recommendation of spreading out the hardware to avoid correlated failures, but it makes sense for achieving low latency in systems. If the applications are deployed on multiple racks to increase resiliency, the system architecture should ensure that there is no cross-rack connectivity and each microservice has its binary deployed on all the racks. To avoid system downtimes, the disaster-recovery strategy becomes important, such as multiple on-premises data centers deployed with AWS Outposts.

Hardware selection

AWS offers a wide range of instance types, and choosing the best for the workload determines the execution latency; we recommend proper benchmarking to come up with the best instance configurations. EBS volumes used for the workload play equally important roles, and AWS Nitro SSD volumes are helpful in achieving submillisecond latency.

Data caching

Database reads can introduce I/O bottlenecks, adding to the execution latency. In-memory data stores can be more helpful for achieving low latency. These data stores can be used as a caching layer on top of persistent disk stores or used as a primary data store (with a disk-persistence option to avoid data loss) for hot paths such as order execution. We also recommend using Amazon CloudFront wherever feasible for caching the content near the end users.

AWS edge infrastructure

We mentioned that latency can be reduced by reducing the distance, but one of the places we don’t have control is the public internet. Customers connecting to broker application servers through the public internet can introduce unwanted network latency; this can be further reduced by using AWS Local Zones (discussed in Chapter 9 ). Local Zones enable us to place the infrastructure much closer to the customers compared to AWS regions and are very helpful in latency-sensitive applications. AWS Wavelength is another edge infrastructure that is helpful for deploying infrastructure to the edge of the telecommunication carrier’s 5G networks. This allows for faster communication with 5G-enabled devices. We might not be able to get the best out of it at present, but this will be helpful in the future when most devices are 5G enabled. There is a possibility that Local and Wavelength Zones are still not near the end customers; for these use cases, AWS Outposts is the solution. AWS Outposts allow customers to extend the AWS infrastructure to their on-premises data centers and connect directly to AWS regions using AWS Direct Connect.

We’ve discussed multiple ways to optimize latency via the AWS infrastructure here. Regular evaluation of the software will help you identify the processes consuming more execution time. Figuring out the exact places where the software is taking more time can help identify a path forward and fix the issue. For example, you might want to denormalize the data to avoid unnecessary joins and improve the query performance; consider using Protobuf or Simple Binary Encoding (SBE) instead of JSON/XML to transfer payload over the network. Another general recommendation for ensuring overall system health is to avoid any deployments or infrastructure-configuration modifications (unless it is a critical requirement) during market hours.

Looking back at the architectures in Figures 21-5 and 21-6 , we can see that we skipped some functionalities and focused on only the core components of how users buy and sell stocks. Other components include the following:

User onboarding service 

Onboards the user to the stockbroker based on country and stock exchange compliance. This service is similar to the property onboarding architecture discussed in Chapter 18 where the user is onboarding in a set of steps, so we can leverage solutions like Step Functions.

Payments service

Handles fund transfers from the user’s preferred payment option to a broker account, which can later be used to buy stocks. This service also transfers funds back to the user’s account if stocks are sold or if the user-added funds stay in the broker account too long (per the country’s compliance regulations).

User authentication service

Authenticates the user requests for all the operations that can be performed on the broker application.

The stock exchanges share the market order updates at the end of the day with the broker application via different mechanisms. The mechanism can be a callback posted on our system endpoint or a file with all the data. This can vary from exchange to exchange. The broker system takes the following actions based on the updates received from the exchange systems:

- Compute P&L for the users.
- Update the user tradebook.
- Notify users of the trades executed for the day.

It’s important to note that the stockbroker application can offer stock listings from different stock exchange platforms. The network connectivity will be somewhat similar, but the rules that the RMS holds or the deployment of the OMS can be different. We recommend operating under the assumption that the stock exchange platforms can vary, such as in the ways that the exchange and broker systems communicate; the broker system gathers market updates from the exchange systems; and the orders are executed. This will help you address any specific future tasks for different stock exchange systems. We’ll design the system in the next section keeping separate deployments for the RMS and OMS mapped to a stock exchange.

To also help with scale, developer dependency should be minimized with respect to operations tasks, such as adding or modifying rules in the RMS. The RMS should expose a portal for the operations team to access and modify the rule set. Additionally, the system should have some type of mechanism for testing these rules in the staging environment before they can be moved to the production environment (with a percentage-based rollout strategy). The storage solution maintaining the rules should keep versions of the rule configs as they are modified over time. Any created order should have a rule-config version associated with it. This helps create an audit history to verify the rules executed by the system for successful validation before allowing a trade to happen.

Let’s move to Day N architecture on the AWS cloud next.

## Day N Architecture

In the Day 0 architecture, we used Refinitiv and LSEG as placeholder systems for the OMS and for retrieving live market data needs. The third-party systems are ideally designed for the scale. These systems are used for illustrative purposes only, and we don’t recommend integrating these systems in your architecture. Analyze different solutions available in the industry (or developing a custom solution) to determine what works best for your organization. Involvement of on-premises data centers in the overall architecture also depends on the country and stock exchange compliance regulations. Some stock exchanges restrict the broker applications to only connect to stock exchanges from an on-premises data center via dedicated leased lines (as in Figure 21-4 ).

To start scaling the system to more live, concurrent users, we’ll split the architecture discussion into two parts: the system serving live and historical market data and the system responsible for executing orders.

### Market data delivery

For the requirements of both the live market data and the order execution systems, we’ll rely on the colocation space offered by the stock exchanges (e.g., Nasdaq ). This will help reduce overall network hops, optimizing latency and removing dependency on third-party vendors wherever possible. Further, streaming TBT market data to all the clients consumes a lot of bandwidth, so ideally, exchanges stream up to level 2 data (approximately three ticks per second). For use cases to serve level 3 and TBT data, broker applications are required to host their servers in colocation space and consume the TBT data streams.

The broker server colocated in the stock exchange data center consumes the TBT market data, transforms the TBT data to level 3 data, compresses the level 3 data, and streams the data to an on-premises data center via a dedicated leased line. From the on-premises data center, the data is streamed to AWS regions via AWS Direct Connect and delivered to users via the SLTS over a persistent WebSocket connection. The on-premises data center is introduced in between with the assumption that the stock exchange mandates this per regulations. In case this is not mandated, the data can be streamed from the stock exchange to the AWS region directly via Direct Connect. The overall architecture with live and historical stock ticks is shown in Figure 21-7 ; networking components like gateways, LBs, and the edge cache are skipped to keep the diagram simple.

In this architecture, we assumed that the stock exchange servers are hosted in a self-managed data center. Nowadays, stock exchanges are also migrating to the cloud to host the infrastructure and reduce operational burden. Even with on-premises data centers, stock exchanges are trying to leverage services like AWS Local Zones, which can help achieve the benefits of the cloud in the self-hosted data centers.

[image: image]

###### Figure 21-7. Stock ticker system

### Market order execution

The flow of requests in market order execution systems is opposite the flow in market data delivery systems. The request starts with the user, with an intent to execute an order. The stockbroker system validates the request for execution and forwards the request to the stock exchange system upon successful validation. The architecture will be similar to Figure 21-6 with some improvements, such as the OMS can be owned by the broker application instead of relying on third-party vendors. We already recommended including a separate deployment per stock exchange for the systems with behavior specific to each stock exchange. An additional component from Figure 21-6 will be an offline data orchestrator to work asynchronously for updates received from the stock exchange system at the end of the day for the trades executed.

The stock exchange is not guaranteed to send the response of order execution against the same request, so we should think about introducing a queue before the OMS. The broker application, upon receiving the request, runs the set of rules to identify if the order can be executed and publishes the request to the OMS queue. The OMS polls the messages from the queue and forwards to the stock exchange system for actual order matching. The Day N architecture is shown in Figure 21-8 .

[image: image]

###### Figure 21-8. Market order execution architecture

We discussed improving execution latency in “Scaling to Millions and Beyond” ; system resiliency is another important consideration for overall success.

### System resilience

The system should be able to operate even in the case of hardware failures and recover without any downtimes. The general recommendation to improve resiliency of applications is to deploy in multiple AZs and regions. Most AWS-managed services take care of this by default; for example, Amazon Aurora persists two copies of each write operation in three AZs.

We generally deploy the infrastructure across the AZs of an AWS region, and it by default takes care of issues like AZ downtimes (which rarely happen). With respect to stockbroker applications, we discussed using on-premises data centers or AWS local zones for infrastructure hosting, which brings the maintenance overhead onto our plate.

Follow these recommendations to improve system resiliency:

- To avoid issues in a server rack, keep a duplicate server rack with the same set of services so that the system can default to another server rack in case of failures.
- If the entire data center goes down, the system should be able to operate from a different data center. The other data center can again be on-premises or systems deployed in one of the AZs of an AWS region. With the assumption that these scenarios rarely happen, our recommendation is to host the same set of services in the AWS region, and traffic can be served from there for any issues. The important thing to consider here is active database replication to refer to the current state of ongoing orders and continue the operations from other data centers.
- Figure 21-8 shows one OMS per stock exchange. There is a further possibility of sharding the workload, removing the single point of failure. Each sharded OMS has independent connectivity with the stock exchange network, increasing the overall availability of the system.

# Conclusion

Choosing infrastructure and technology is equally as important as writing software; a perfectly written software application can perform badly if inappropriate technology for deployment is selected. The focus of Part III has been on identifying the requirements and the business use case to finalize a solution.

We gathered multiple suggestions and optimizations that we can do at the software and infrastructure levels for improving the execution latency of systems. There are very few ultra-low-latency business use cases, and they require specific solutions. We recommend having maximum control of the software and hardware for these use cases. Every decision with software and hardware configurations becomes important with ultra-low-latency systems, so we don’t recommend fully managed services for these use cases. The reason is simple: the fully managed services are designed for all general-purpose use cases, but you have very specific requirements. The fully managed service might be bundled with 10 features, but you just need one with full control.

Let’s look at an example of self-hosting versus using cloud-managed services and compare it to cooking your own food versus hiring a cook (or ordering online, eating out, etc.) for preparing meals. Cooking food (or self-hosting software) gives you full control to the lowest of the configurations. If you hire a cook, you can buy groceries or spices, but you can’t control the cooking speed, chopping style, quantity of spices—and the list goes on. This is the same with managed services: you may be able to specify RAM size and number of vCPUs (or any other configuration depending on the service), but you don’t have the control to tune the software at the OS or hardware level.

I (Mandeep) cook my own food. I like the process, and it doesn’t take much time because I have gained expertise over time. People are really surprised when they learn that I cook my own meals, and I get a lot of questions about time management. This is also an issue with self-hosting—you might get worried about engineering-bandwidth requirements for managing the systems, the learning curve, how to handle system downtimes, and so on, but these are not issues most of the time. The theme of this entire book is making sure you evaluate your business use cases before making a decision. If you’re able to justify the decision of using managed services, then go ahead with it. For example, I cook food almost every day but take a break from cooking and save some time for other interests by ordering biryani from Zomato (an online food-ordering platform in India similar to DoorDash in the US) every Sunday afternoon.

It’s not possible to cover each and every aspect of AWS systems within the scope of this book. Think about what we’ve talked about throughout the book and applying what you’ve learned to the systems that you’re designing or that you aspire to design. We hope this book has helped enhance your understanding of system design in the AWS cloud and wish you the very best for your future system-design decisions.

[image: ]

### System Design on AWS

Jayanth Kumar , Mandeep Singh
Published by O'Reilly Media, Inc.20% completeContent Progress 20% completedApprox. 15 hours left

1. Foreword queue 100% complete checkmark circle
2. Preface queue 100% complete checkmark circle
3. I. System Design Basics queue 100% complete checkmark circle
4. 1. System Design Trade-offs and Guidelines queue 54% complete
5. 2. Storage Types and Relational Stores queue 1% complete
6. 3. Nonrelational Stores queue 100% complete checkmark circle
7. 4. Caching Policies and Strategies queue 2% complete
8. 5. Load Balancing Approaches and Techniques queue 3% complete
9. 6. Communication Networks and Protocols queue 2% complete
10. 7. Containerization, Orchestration, and Deployments queue 2% complete
11. 8. Architectural Designs and Patterns queue 1% complete
12. II. Diving Deep into AWS Services queue
13. 9. AWS Network Services queue 2% complete
14. 10. AWS Storage Services queue 1% complete
15. 11. AWS Compute Services queue 3% complete
16. 12. AWS Messaging, Orchestration, Monitoring, and Access Management Services queue 100% complete checkmark circle
17. 13. Big Data, Analytics, and Machine Learning Services queue
18. III. System Design Use Cases queue
19. 14. Designing a URL Shortener Service queue 2% complete
20. 15. Designing a Web Crawler and Search Engine queue 1% complete
21. 16. Designing a Social Network and Newsfeed System queue 2% complete
22. 17. Designing an Online Game Leaderboard queue 2% complete
23. 18. Designing a Hotel Reservation System queue 2% complete
24. 19. Designing a Chat Application queue 100% complete checkmark circle
25. 20. Designing a Video-Processing Pipeline for a Streaming Service queue
26. 21. Designing an Online Stock-Trading Platform queue System Requirements Show More Items Starting with the Design Show More Items Launching the System on AWS Show More Items Conclusion
27. Index queue
28. About the Authors queue
